                                    Appendix III




   Updated Physics (Secondary 4-6)
Curriculum and Assessment Framework

          (Consultation Draft)




   Curriculum Development Council
              June 2026
                                         Preamble

Physics (Secondary 4-6) Curriculum and Assessment Frameworks (Consultation Draft) is a
consultation document sets out the proposed update of the Physics Curriculum for Senior
Secondary Level. This curriculum document presents the proposed curriculum rationale and
curriculum framework and assessment framework of Physics (Secondary 4 – 6), including the
learning targets, curriculum emphases and curriculum contents and public assessment. It also
includes two Annexes, namely “The Use of Digital Educational Tools and Artificial
Intelligence for Learning, Teaching and Assessment of Physics” and “Connection across
Learning of Senior Secondary Science Subjects”, which provide further guidance on promoting
effective pedagogical use of digital and AI tools, as well as strengthening curriculum
connection among the science subjects. The views collected from this consultation will be
taken into consideration in the development of Science Education Key Learning Area Physics
Curriculum and Assessment Guide (Secondary 4-6).



Views and suggestions on this document may be sent to:



          Chief Curriculum Development Officer (Science)

          Science Education Section, Innovation Technology Education Division

          Education Bureau

          Room E232, 2/F, East Block

          Education Bureau Kowloon Tong Education Services Centre

          19 Suffolk Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

          Fax:      2194 0670

          E-mail:   science@edb.gov.hk




                                               i
                                    Contents
                                                                                  Page
Preamble                                                                            i
Chapter 1   Introduction                                                           1
            1.1 Background                                                         1
            1.2 Curriculum Rationale                                               2
            1.3 Curriculum Aims                                                    3
Chapter 2   Curriculum Framework                                                   5
            2.1 Learning Targets                                                   6
                2.1.1    Knowledge and Understanding                               6
                2.1.2    Skills and Processes                                      6
                2.1.3    Values and Attitudes                                      8
            2.2 Curriculum Emphases                                               11
                 2.2.1 Scientific Inquiry                                         11
                 2.2.2 Computational Physics                                      13
                 2.2.3 Nature of Science                                          18
            2.3 Curriculum Structure and Organisation                             19
                2.3.1    Curriculum Structure and Time Allocation                 20
                2.3.2    Curriculum Organisation                                  20
                 2.3.3    Curriculum Contents                                     23
Chapter 3   Assessment Framework                                                  77
            3.1 Assessment Objectives                                             77
            3.2 Assessment Design                                                 77
                 3.2.1    Mode of assessment                                      77
                 3.2.2    Public examination                                      78
                 3.2.3    School-based assessment                                 78
Annexes     1. The Use of Digital Educational Tools and Artificial Intelligence   80
                for Learning, Teaching and Assessment of Physics
            2. Connections across Learning of Senior Secondary Science            85
                Subjects
            3. Summary of proposed updates in contents of the Physics             101
                curriculum
Membership of the Working Group on the Review of the Physics Curriculum           105
and Assessment
Membership of the CDC-HKEAA Committee on Physics                                  106
Chapter 1           Introduction
1.1       Background


Science education cultivates students’ curiosity about the world and enhances scientific
thinking. Through systematic inquiry, students will develop scientific knowledge and skills
to help them evaluate the impact of scientific and technological developments. This will
prepare them to become lifelong learners in science and technology and responsible citizens,
and to contribute to our scientific and technological world.


Building on the Science Education curriculum across primary and junior secondary education,
Physics, along with Chemistry and Biology, is offered as an elective subject under Science
Education Key Learning Area in the senior secondary curriculum.


The Physics Curriculum and Assessment Guide (Secondary 4-6) was first published in 2007.
It was then updated in January 2014 and November 2015 in response to the recommendations
made in the Short-term Review and the Medium-term Review in 2012 and 2014 respectively
as well as the Ongoing Renewal of the School Curriculum thereafter to fine-tune the senior
secondary Physics curriculum and assessment.


Following the recommendations from the Task Force on Review of School Curriculum and the
corresponding optimisation of the four senior secondary core subjects in 2021, the curriculum
and assessment of the elective subjects, including Physics, were also reviewed along the same
directions to formulate measures to create space for students and cater for learner diversity. A
working group was established under the CDC-HKEAA Committee on Physics in November
2023 to review and revise the Physics curriculum. On top of creating space for students and
catering for learner diversity, the Physics curriculum was reviewed with the aims of
strengthening the interface with the updated Science (Secondary 1-3) curriculum for further
developing students’ scientific literacy, enabling them to understand the impact and application
of science for life and society, and fostering their science foundations for innovation and future
pathways. The review also incorporated the directions set out in the report by the Task Force
entitled “Optimise the curriculum for the future, foster whole-person development and diverse
talents”, the Curriculum Development Council’s Secondary Education Curriculum Guide
(CDC, 2017), the Science Education Key Learning Area Curriculum Guide (Primary 1 –
Secondary 6) (CDC, 2017), and the Supplement to the Science Education Key Learning Area
Curriculum Guide – Science (Secondary 1 to 3) Curriculum Framework (CDC, 2025).

                                                1
1.2       Curriculum Rationale


The Physics Curriculum is designed to enthuse and nurture students to become scientifically
literate, while providing a strong foundation in science that enables them to innovate and pursue
further studies and careers in science and technology. It emphasises the cultivation of
curiosity about the physical world and universal laws, the strengthening of scientific thinking,
and the development of an understanding of how physical knowledge is generated,
communicated and applied.


Building on these directions, the Physics Curriculum articulates two closely linked rationales:
(i) developing scientific literacy through physics, enabling students to understand and apply
physical laws and theories, scientific thinking and scientific inquiry skills to explain
phenomena, solve problems and make informed decisions in daily life; and (ii) providing
strong foundations for innovation and future pathways, by equipping students with
essential physics concepts and scientific practices needed to progress to Innovation and
Technology-related studies and careers. Coherent learning experiences that integrate core
physics ideas, scientific inquiry processes, and values and attitudes enable students to explain
scientific phenomena, solve problems and make evidence-based judgements, while preparing
them to participate constructively in an increasingly innovation-driven and sustainability-
focused world.



1.2.1     Developing scientific literacy through physics


The Physics Curriculum aims to develop students’ scientific literacy by integrating scientific
knowledge, inquiry practices, and values and attitudes through meaningful learning
experiences.     By engaging in various learning experiences, such as experimental
investigations, conceptual learning on physics models, scientific inquiry, data analysis, use of
physical representations, and socio-scientific discussions, students learn to apply scientific
thinking to explain phenomena, solve problems, and evaluate science-related issues in personal,
societal and global contexts.


Students gain an understanding of how physics knowledge is generated, tested and refined, and
learn to construct evidence-based explanations using appropriate physical language and
representations. They also examine the ethical, social, economic and environmental
implications of physical and technological developments. This strengthens their ability to

                                               2
make informed decisions, recognise the strengths and limitations of science, and take
responsible actions in a society shaped by scientific advancement and sustainable development.


1.2.2     Providing strong science foundations for innovation and future pathways


Physics involves the study of universal laws, and of the behaviours and relationships among a
wide range of physical phenomena. With a solid foundation in physics, students should be
able to appreciate both the intrinsic beauty and quantitative nature of physical phenomena, and
the role of physics in many important developments in engineering, medicine, economics and
other fields of science and technology.


The Physics Curriculum equips students with solid theoretical knowledge, practical
competence and scientific reasoning skills. Through inquiry-based learning and application
of concepts in authentic contexts, students develop quantitative reasoning and data analysis
skills, critical thinking and an appreciation of the nature of science and its connections with
technology, society and the environment.


When students take Chemistry and/or Biology together with Physics at the senior secondary
level, the coherence across science subjects further strengthens their conceptual understanding
and transferable competencies. Shared principles and inquiry practices reinforce learning,
promote interdisciplinary thinking and enhance students’ capacity to apply knowledge across
domains. Such integrated preparation supports progression to post-secondary studies in
science, engineering, health sciences and other innovation-driven fields, enabling students to
contribute to scientific advancement and sustainable development in a knowledge-based
economy.



1.3       Curriculum Aims


The overarching aim of the Physics Curriculum is to provide students with physics-related
learning experiences that develop scientific literacy, enabling them to participate actively in a
rapidly changing knowledge-based society, prepare for further studies or careers in Physics-
and STEAM-related fields, and become lifelong learners in science and technology.


The broad aims of the Physics Curriculum are to enable students to:
• develop interest and maintain a sense of wonder and curiosity about physics and science;

                                               3
•   construct and apply physics knowledge to explain and solve problems using physical laws
    and models, and appreciate the relationship between physics and other disciplines;
•   understand the nature of science, including the usefulness, limitations and evolving nature
    of scientific knowledge;
•   acquire scientific knowledge, inquiry skills and scientific reasoning to investigate physical
    phenomena and address unfamiliar situations with creativity and resilience;
•   think, communicate and collaborate scientifically, and discuss, evaluate and make
    informed judgements on physics-related issues using the language of science;
•   recognise the social, ethical, economic, environmental and technological implications of
    physics and develop a commitment to act as responsible citizens in promoting sustainable
    development; and
•   become lifelong learners in science, and be prepared for further studies and future careers
    in science, technology and engineering-related fields.




                                               4
Chapter 2           Curriculum Framework

The Physics (S4-6) curriculum framework embodies the key knowledge, skills, values and
attitudes that students are to develop at senior secondary level. It forms the basis on which
schools and teachers can plan their school-based curriculum, and design appropriate learning,
teaching and assessment activities.


At the heart of the curriculum are three key emphases: “Scientific Inquiry”, “Computational
Physics” and “Nature of Science”. These emphases, which stem from the curriculum rationale,
guide the design and implementation of the curriculum, aiming to develop students’ scientific
literacy as well as their capacity and commitment to integrate and apply knowledge and skills
across disciplines to address real-world challenges effectively and creatively.


This curriculum serves as a continuation of the Science (S1-3) Curriculum. With careful
consideration of students’ prior knowledge and everyday experiences, it is designed to cover
major aspects of physics, and to highlight close connection to social, technological and
environmental issues. The curriculum framework has three interconnected components:
Learning Targets, Curriculum Emphases, and Curriculum Content. Figure 2.1 represents the
relationships between the various components.



                                           Learning Targets

      Knowledge and Understanding             Skills and Processes   Values and Attitudes

                                        Curriculum Emphases

            Scientific Inquiry              Computational Physics     Nature of Science

                                         Curriculum Content

                                  Classical Physics
                                                                               Scientific
                                 Physics in daily life                         Inquiry in
                                                                                Physics
                                  Modern Physics

     Figure 2.1 Diagrammatic Representation of the Physics Curriculum Framework


                                                    5
2.1           Learning Targets
2.1.1         Knowledge and understanding
Students are expected to:
⚫   understand phenomena, facts and patterns, principles, concepts, laws, theories and models
    in physics;
⚫   learn the vocabulary, terminology and conventions used in physics;
⚫   acquire knowledge of techniques and skills specific to the study of physics; and
⚫   develop an understanding of technological applications of physics and of their social
    implications.


2.1.2         Skills and processes
Through studying physics, students are expected to develop generic skills, including basic
skills, thinking skills, skills of using digital tools and artificial intelligence (AI), and personal
and social skills. More specific skills and processes in physics are:
      (1)     Asking questions and defining problem
      (2)     Planning and carrying out investigations/designing and carrying out solutions
      (3)     Analysing and interpreting data
      (4)     Developing and using physical models
      (5)     Constructing scientific reasoning and argumentation


(1)    Asking questions and defining problem
Students are expected to:
    ⚫  identify attributes of objects or natural phenomena;
    ⚫  ask relevant questions in a concise and objective manner;
    ⚫  use digital tools, including AI, to search for, select and organise physics information;
    ⚫  propose hypotheses for scientific phenomena and devise methods to test them;
    ⚫  identify dependent and independent variables in investigations;
    ⚫  clarify and analyse problems related to physics;
    ⚫  suggest creative ideas or solutions to problems; and
    ⚫       propose solution plans and evaluate their feasibility.


(2) Planning and carrying out investigations/designing and carrying out solutions
Students are expected to:
    ⚫       apply knowledge and principles of physics to solve problems;
    ⚫       devise appropriate strategies to deal with issues that may arise;
                                                    6
   ⚫   devise plans and procedures to carry out experiments;
   ⚫   select appropriate methods, apparatus and digital tools (e.g. data-loggers and sensors,
       spreadsheets, AI-generated computer simulations) to carry out investigations;
   ⚫   observe and record experimental observations accurately and honestly;
   ⚫   select appropriate apparatus and materials for an experiment;
   ⚫   carry out experiments according to the planned procedures;
   ⚫   propose plans for further investigations, if appropriate;
   ⚫   handle apparatus properly and safely;
   ⚫   measure to the precision allowed by the instruments;
   ⚫   recognise the limitations of instruments used; and
   ⚫   search, retrieve, reorganise, analyse and interpret scientific information from libraries,
       the media, the Internet and multi-media software packages.

(3) Analysing and interpreting data
Students are expected to:
   ⚫   interpret observations and experimental data; and
   ⚫   evaluate experimental methods and suggest possible improvements;
   ⚫   put forward suitable reasoning to choose between alternatives;
   ⚫   organise and analyse data, and infer from observations and experimental results;
   ⚫   use proper graphical techniques appropriately to display experimental results and to
       convey concepts;
   ⚫   use appropriate digital tools (e.g. spreadsheets, graphing software and AI) to process,
       interpret and present experimental data and scientific information;
   ⚫   produce reports on investigations, draw conclusions and make further predictions;
   ⚫   evaluate experimental results and identify factors affecting their quality and reliability;
       and
   ⚫   use information technology to manage and present information, and to develop habits
       of self-directed learning.


(4) Developing and using physical models
Students are expected to:
   ⚫   utilise appropriate digital tools (e.g. AI) to identify complex patterns and regularities in
       the natural world to construct models for predicting future trends;
   ⚫   examine evidence and apply logical reasoning to draw valid conclusions;
   ⚫   present concepts of physics in mathematical terms whenever appropriate;
   ⚫   understand the fundamental roles and functions of models in exploring observed natural

                                                7
        phenomena;
   ⚫    realise the need of modifying existing models when new evidence is found;
   ⚫    examine theories and concepts through logical reasoning and experimentation;
   ⚫    adopt the best models which can explain counter-intuitive phenomena; and
   ⚫    integrate concepts within a framework of knowledge, and apply this to new situations.

(5) Constructing scientific reasoning and argumentation
Students are expected to:
   ⚫    make well-informed decisions based on the examination of evidence and arguments;
   ⚫    support judgments using appropriate scientific principles;
   ⚫    recognise preconceptions or misconceptions with the aid of experimental evidence;
   ⚫    comprehend articles involving physics terminology, concepts and principles;
   ⚫    use appropriate terminology to communicate information related to physics in oral,
        written or other suitable forms;
   ⚫    organise, present and communicate physics ideas in a precise and logical manner;
   ⚫    work effectively through liaising, negotiating and compromising with others in science
        project teams to construct scientific reasoning and argumentation;
   ⚫    evaluate the reliability, limitations and possible biases of information, explanations and
        visualisations produced by digital tools and AI, by comparing them with trusted
        scientific information sources; and
   ⚫    distinguish among fact, opinion and value judgment in processing scientific
        information.


2.1.3     Values and Attitudes

(1) towards themselves and others
Students are expected to:
   ⚫    develop and possess positive values and attitudes such as curiosity to the nature or
        phenomenon, honesty, respect for evidence, perseverance and tolerance of uncertainty
        through the study of physics;
   ⚫    develop a habit of self-reflection and the ability to think critically;
   ⚫    be willing to communicate and comment on issues related to physics and science;
   ⚫    develop open-mindedness and responsive to ideas and constructive criticism from team
        members;
   ⚫    be able to show tolerance and respect towards the opinions and decisions of others even
        in disagreement;

                                                8
   ⚫   demonstrate ethical and responsible use of digital tools and AI in science context,
       including protecting data privacy, acknowledging AI and digital assistance
       appropriately, and avoiding plagiarism;
   ⚫   act responsibly to accomplish allocated tasks and be aware of the importance of safety
       for themselves and others; and
   ⚫   be committed to safe practices in their daily lives.


(2) towards physics and the world we are living in
Students are expected to:
   ⚫   appreciate achievements in physics discovery and recognise their limitations;
   ⚫   accept the provisional status of the knowledge and theory of physics;
   ⚫   apply the knowledge of physics rationally in making well-informed decisions or
       judgments on issues in their daily lives; and
   ⚫   be aware of the social, economic, environmental and technological implications of the
       advancements in physics.


(3) towards learning as a lifelong process
Students are expected to:
   ⚫   recognise the evolutionary nature of scientific knowledge, thereby understand the
       importance of constant update of knowledge in the world of science and technology;
   ⚫   be exposed to new developments in physics, science and technology and develop an
       interest in them;
   ⚫   recognise the importance of lifelong learning in our rapidly changing knowledge-based
       society;
   ⚫   develop their study skills to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of their learning;
   ⚫   engage in self-directed learning activities in the study of physics; and
   ⚫   develop basic learning habits, abilities and attitudes that are essential to the foundation
       of lifelong and independent learning.




                                                9
Figure 2.2 summarises the learning targets of the curriculum.



  phenomena, facts, patterns, principles,
                                                         towards themselves and others
   concepts, laws, theories and models
                                                         towards physics and the world
  vocabulary, terminology and conventions
                                                         towards learning
  knowledge of techniques and skills

  applications of physics




                Knowledge and                                       Values and
                Understanding                                        Attitudes




                                             Learning
                                              Targets




                                         Skills and Processes




        With the aid of digital tools and AI
        (1) Asking questions and defining problem
        (2) Planning and carrying out investigations/designing and carrying out solutions
        (3) Analysing and interpreting data
        (4) Developing and using physical models
        (5) Constructing scientific reasoning and argumentation


                 Figure 2.2 Learning Targets of the Physics Curriculum




                                             10
2.2          Curriculum Emphases
Three Curriculum Emphases, Scientific Inquiry, Computational Physics and Nature of
Science are the important components of this curriculum for students to build up essential skills
to face the recent and future challenges of rapidly evolving innovation and technology (I&T).



2.2.1        Scientific Inquiry

Students are expected to acquire inquiry skills that usually used in Physics through practical
activities and inquiry-based learning activities to understand how physicists devise physical
models and solve problems.

Scientific Inquiry Skills for Physics (S4-6)

Measurements, data analysis and error treatments are essential skills in studying Physics.
Students should learn using apparatus safely, measuring numerical data accurately with
appropriate data analysis and error treatments in order to draw reasonable conclusions. It is
crucial to use appropriate units and the order of magnitude to describe the physical world in a
sensible manner.

The curriculum emphasises the scientific inquiry skills in the aspects of experiment Techniques,
data Analysis, order of accuracy and Error treatment, and awareness of Safety.

 1. Experiment Techniques
        i.    calibrate apparatus before measurements
       ii.    make rough preliminary measurements and calculations where appropriate, e.g. to
              assess the best range for accurate measurements
      iii.    read to the maximum accuracy of linear and angular scales, such as ruler, spring balance
              and protractor
      iv.     make alignments accurately or locate peak value(s)
       v.     connect and check electrical circuit components according to a circuit diagram; draw a
              circuit diagram for a given simple circuit that already connected up
 2. Data Analysis
        i.    know the SI base units and the corresponding physical quantities
       ii.    derive units as products or quotients of the base units
      iii.    handle data properly, and display and present results in tabular and/or graphical form
      iv.     plot graph or fit curve accurately with suitable choice of scales




                                                     11
                                                                         1
      v.    transform formulae into linear graphs; e.g. plot y against
                                                                         x
                                                                           for xy = constant, plot y

                    1
            against x2 for inverse square law

     vi.    interpret physical meaning of quantities from graphs; e.g. intercepts, slope, area under
            the graph
 3. Order of Accuracy and Error Treatment
       i.   repeat measurements and identify outliers in order to reduce the effect of random error
      ii.   quote results to a number of significant figures and/or decimal places reasonably in
            keeping with their estimated accuracy
     iii.   identify absolute and relative (or percentage) error
     iv.    estimate maximum error in simple cases
      v.    make sense appreciation to order of magnitude and accuracy of common measurements
            (not merely of scale readings)
 4. Awareness of Safety



Practical activities

Practical activities offer students opportunities to apply physics concepts and develop scientific
inquiry skills under practical context. These learning opportunities enable students to develop
competency in analysing data with appropriate use of graphs and calculations. Students are
also expected to recognise the limitations of measurements and justify whether the errors are
within the acceptable range to support the experiment result.

Wide variety of practical tasks are listed in the suggested learning and teaching activities in
Chapter 2.3. Some of them are identified as key practical tasks of which target on equipping
students with essential scientific inquiry skills in physics. Teachers should exercise
professional judgement in integrating practical tasks in the learning and teaching of relevant
topics, either demonstration or students’ hands-on practical, and align with the requirements of
School-based Assessment (SBA) when arranging hands-on practical tasks for students.
Details would be included in Chapter 3: Assessment of the Physics (S4-6) Curriculum and
Assessment Guide. Computational Physics experiments are encouraged. Nevertheless, it is
noteworthy that they differ from simply utilising readily available simulations. For details,
please refer to session 2.2.2.




                                                    12
2.2.2     Computational Physics

Computational Physics is to apply computational methods to model physical phenomena for
solving problems, this can be exemplified in different topics in the Physics (S4-6) curriculum.
It combines physical concepts with the application of mathematical modelling and computer
programming. It should cover the process of analysing real world problems, formulating and
solving models, interpreting the solutions as real world solutions, and evaluating the models.
This is an effective strategy to promote digital education and facilitate students in learning
advanced innovations and technology. Figure 2.3 shows the essential elements in
Computational Physics:

                                           Physics
                                          concepts &
                                          phenomena



                                        Computational
                                          Physics
                           Computing
                                                        Mathematical
                           hardware &
                                                         modelling
                            software



                 Figure 2.3 Essential elements in Computational Physics



In Computational Physics learning activities, students can reveal the underlying mechanism
within complex systems and foster a greater appreciation for computational advancement in
physics problems. Computers enable simulating phenomena by progressions of parameters
with very small intervals, or measure and record data at extra high frequency. Students can
make use of computing power to probe deep in applying and consolidating relevant physical
concepts during the learning process.

Two kinds of learning activities are suggested to implement Computational Physics: building
computational models and computer-assisted data analysis.




                                              13
Building Computational Models

This is to apply computational methods to build models representing physical systems or
phenomena. Students may build computational models to experience its underlying
mechanism that mimics real-world scenarios. This is different from using simulations that are
readily available in illustrating physics concepts. Students should engage in the model-
building process by making appropriate approximations and simplifications to solve a physics
problem. Teachers can adopt appropriate software to conduct the learning activities, such as
Python, C++, spreadsheet or visual programming language (VPL), based on students’ learning
needs and readiness.

Students are expected to be able to:

     translate physics into computer program codes
     build algorithms using conditional logic in programming
     develop and use computational models to simulate or predict physical phenomena
     modify the model in response to new evidence or by introducing complexity

During S4 – S6, students can explore establishing numerical methods to build computational
models of physical systems which are difficult to solve analytically. Two widely applicable
techniques are the Monte Carlo method and the Finite Difference method.

The Finite Difference method approximates derivatives in differential equations using discrete
differences, enabling numerical solutions for problems like projectile (modeling position over
time), where students set up grids, apply boundary conditions, iterate steps, and visualise results,
this helps students understand smaller intervals results in more accurate simulations. The
Monte Carlo method employs random sampling to simulate probabilistic phenomena, such as
estimating radioactive decay half-lives or particle diffusion by generating large numbers of
random trials and computing statistical averages, helping students understand convergence,
probability in physics, and statistical uncertainty.

These methods extend the learning of computational physics and can be
implemented using spreadsheets with guided templates, allowing students
to modify parameters, validate against theory, and appreciate
computational physics as a powerful tool for investigating complex
systems. Teachers can adapt the computational model building learning
activity examples with reference to students’ abilities and the teaching
context.




                                                14
Computer-Assisted Data Analysis

This is to attempt different ways to gather and analyse data with the aid of computer, include
creating or collecting data, preparing data for analysis, making claims from data, and presenting
data logically and systematically. Basically, students should learn analysing a set of raw data
by computer, including fitting linear graphs or curves, interpreting values from graphs and
justifying the effect of error. Spreadsheet is commonly used for this purpose, such as putting
experimental data of the amount of energy transfer versus temperature to find the specific heat
capacity.

Students are expected to be able to use computing tools to

    Collect, import, and organise raw experimental or simulated data into appropriate digital
     formats (e.g. entering measurements into spreadsheets, importing data files from data
     loggers, and structuring data with clear headings, units, and significant figures)
    Prepare datasets for analysis by performing basic operations such as unit conversions,
     calculating derived quantities (e.g. averages, rates, or ratios), identifying and handling
     outliers or anomalous values, and applying appropriate error estimation skills
    Create and fit appropriate graphical representations using spreadsheet functions or built-
     in tools, including plotting linear relationships (e.g. y = mx + c), and adding trendlines
     with displayed equations to model physical phenomena
    Interpret graphical outputs by extracting key parameters (e.g. slope of curve and
     intercepts), justifying the physical significance of results, evaluating the impact of
     measurement uncertainties and random/systematic errors on conclusions

Students can learn various computational methods in obtaining data sets, such as extracting
open data from observatories or generating data with the aid of computers. Various kinds of
tools are readily available, such as motion video analysis (MVA), software-define radio (SDR)
and various kinds of mobile Apps. Teachers can start teaching students to use computing
devices for data collection and analysis in S4, using MVA to investigate linear motion and
mobile Apps to investigate inverse square law of intensity. Students can acquire essential
skills in collecting, analysing and interpreting data in tables and graphs.




                                               15
Implementation and Progression of Computational Physics

Teachers should note that building computational model and computer-assisted data
analysis are not mutually exclusive in authentic tasks, but often to be an integration of them.
This classification offers a framework for reference to facilitate implementation. At early
stages and in connection with the curriculum, teachers may introduce simple Computational
Physics activities under Classical Physics, such as modelling simple motions, analysing
physical quantities in thermal physics and variations of intensity. At later stages, teachers can
introduce more complex computational physics task, such as simulating superposition of wave,
electric field and magnetic field patterns, and radioactive decay process. Under different
schools’ specific context, students’ skills related to Computational Physics may be diversified.
Teachers should exercise professional judgement to integrate Computational Physics into their
learning and teaching to meet students learning needs.

In general, the learning progression for implementing Computational Physics in this curriculum
can be resolved in three key dimensions. In physics concepts and phenomena dimension,
students progress from working with concrete, everyday examples (e.g. simple linear or
circular motions) to handling more abstract ideas and integrating multiple concepts in complex
systems (e.g. wave superposition, electric and magnetic field patterns, or radioactive decay
processes). Regarding computing hardware and software dimension, the progression
moves from guided activities using ready-made templates or simple tools to increasingly self-
directed programming, where students gain sophistication in selecting and manipulating
hardware and/or software in translating mathematical relationships into functional computer
code. Finally, in mathematical modelling dimension, the demand on students' mathematical
skills grows from basic applications (e.g. equations of linear accelerated motion) to more
advanced and complex formulation of equations, including approximations, numerical
methods, and validation against theoretical or experimental results. Teachers should adapt the
pace and depth of these progressions according to their school's specific context and students'
readiness, ensuring that Computational Physics activities remain engaging, accessible, and
closely aligned with the core and extension topics of the curriculum. More examples could be
found in suggested learning and teaching activities in Chapter 2.3.




                                               16
Use of AI in Computational Physics

Vibe coding is a kind of coding where users express their intention using plain speech and the
AI transforms that thinking into executable code. In computational physics, vibe coding
allows students to use natural language to describe physical systems, which an AI then
translates into functional programming code. Vibe coding removes the technical barriers,
including debugging syntax errors, managing library imports, or fixing minor formatting,
acting as a bridge that allows students to move directly from theoretical concepts to
computational models. This approach transforms the student from a passive learner into a
virtual researcher, with assistance of AI to manage the complexity of the coding while they
focus on the profound behaviours of the physical world.

For the initial model-building phase, teachers can guide students to prompt the AI with specific
physical constraints. For instance, a student might prompt the AI to "create a visual simulation
of a simple pendulum using the small-angle approximation". Once the AI generates the
working script, teachers can guide students to focus studying the parameters by identifying and
manipulating key variables within the program code, such as the pendulum's length or the
acceleration due to gravity. Through observation, students can then develop an understanding
of the relationship how the oscillation period changes in response to the adjustments of these
parameters. After mastering the simple pendulum, teachers may lead students to extend the
learning experience through introducing more complex, real-world variables that go beyond
the initial model made by vibe coding by modifying the existing program code. For example,
teachers might challenge students to study damping factor of the simple pendulum.

This teaching approach integrates “computational thinking" and "scientific inquiry",
emphasising students' use of technological and digital tools to solve problems in real situations,
and developing reasoning, creativity and critical thinking skills across data analysis, modeling
and experiments.




                                               17
2.2.3     Nature of Science

Nature of science refers to the beliefs and attitudes towards the knowledge about the natural
world, the methods, and the processes through which scientific knowledge is acquired, and the
sociocultural and historical influences involved. The study of the nature of science could
increase students’ learning interests, enhance their understanding of scientific knowledge, and
facilitate them to make informed decisions about science-related issues in their daily lives.

Some physics-related stories are suggested in each topic to facilitate the introduction nature of
the science through history. Teachers can also adopt diversified learning and teaching
activities, such as practical activities, scientific investigations and reading articles, for students
to experience nature of science.

Students are expected to:

•   be aware of the dynamic nature of physical knowledge and understand that science is a
    human endeavour;
•   be aware that physical laws and theories are developed through observations, hypotheses,
    experimentations, analyses and inferences;
•   understand the nature and limitations of scientific activity; and
•   recognise the contributions of various physicists and scientists to understanding and
    applying physics.




                                                 18
2.3       Curriculum Structure and Organisation
The content knowledge of curriculum consists of three major parts: Classical Physics, Physics
in daily life and Modern Physics.

Classical Physics encompassing theories developed since Ancient Greek provides a
foundational understanding of the natural world. Major areas include Newtonian mechanics,
thermal physics, wave theory and electromagnetism. Despite its limitations in explaining
phenomena at the microscopic levels or fast motion that comparable to speed of light, classical
theories remain essential for understanding everyday objects and systems, and it forms the basis
for many technological applications.

Physics is integral to our daily life, influencing socio-scientific issues, such as sustainable
development and nuclear safety, and enabling students to make informed decisions. Physics
foundations are crucial for innovation, problem solving and technology development.
Professionals in fields such as engineers and modelling experts leverage relevant knowledge
and skills into practical solutions, bridging the gap between researches and technological
advancements.

Modern Physics is regarded as having emerged in the late 19th century, particularly through
quantum theory and relativity, which help us understand the microscopic and macroscopic
worlds. Unlike classical physics, which is deterministic, quantum effects introduce
uncertainties, while relativistic effects explain the deviations observed in measurements of
high‑speed motion.    This knowledge has been widely applied in recent engineering and
technology.

A proportion of lesson time has been allocated for conducting practical tasks, scientific
investigations/engineering design activities and computational physics tasks. Through these
learning experiences, students can develop essential scientific inquiry skills in physics.




                                              19
2.3.1      Curriculum Structure and Time allocation

The curriculum consists of four major components: Classical Physics, Physics in daily life,
Modern Physics and Scientific Inquiry in Physics. The suggested curriculum structure and
time allocation (in hours) for the major components are listed in the following table:

                         Content                          Core     Extension   Total
        Classical    Mechanics                            39          15        54
         Physics     Thermal Physics                      13          3         16
                     Waves                                33          5         38
                     Electricity and Magnetism            32          4         36
        Physics in   Physics and Engineering               8          14        22
        daily life   Physics and Society                  20          3         23
        Modern       Quantum Physics                      14          14        28
         Physics     Astrophysics and Relativity           6          11        17
                                            Sub-total:    164         70       234
     Scientific Inquiry in Physics                                              16
                                     Total lesson time:                        250



2.3.2      Curriculum Organisation

The curriculum is organised into three content knowledge parts and Scientific Inquiry in
Physics. The concepts and principles of physics are inter-related. They cannot be strictly
confined by any artificial topic boundaries. The order of presentation of the topics in this
Chapter generally follows the historical development in Physics. Mechanics contains
fundamental concepts for understanding particle motions in Thermal Physics, oscillations in
Waves and force fields in electromagnetism. Classical Physics laid down the foundation for
students to learn Physics in daily life and Modern Physics. Teachers may adopt teaching
sequences that best cater for students’ learning needs.


The content of each topic is organised into the following parts:



Overview
This part is an introduction to the topic. It provides an overview of the key concepts and
important physics principles, briefly explaining the main points of each topic and the
relationships between its various sections or sub-themes.


                                                   20
Nature of Science
This part suggested some stories about physicists’ research findings, new discoveries or how
physics connected to technology and society. Teachers can make reference of these stories to
help students in understanding and appreciating the nature of science under Physics context.



Student Should learn and Should be Able to
This part lists out the intentions of learning (students should learn) and learning outcomes
(students should be able to) that students should achieve in the knowledge content domain of
the curriculum. The learning outcomes depict the cognitive level of the curriculum content
that students should grasp. Some learning outcomes require fundamental cognitive ability (e.g.
state, realise), while there are learning outcomes that draw on higher cognitive ability (e.g.
explain, interpret). Teachers should observe these learning outcomes to design learning and
teaching activities and set appropriate assessment tasks to monitor students’ learning progress.



Key practical tasks
Key practical tasks are selected learning activities to equip students with solid foundations in
relevant concepts and scientific inquiry skills in physics. Teachers are recommended to
integrate these tasks for students when teaching the relevant topics of the units. These tasks
offer flexibility in the modes of implementation, such as the choices of measuring device, either
demonstration or students’ hands-on practical, and the depth of investigations.



Suggested Learning and Teaching activities
This part suggests activities through which students may achieve the learning outcomes. This
list includes a wide range of activities, such as practical work, investigations, projects and
discussion tasks. They are for teachers’ reference only and not mandatory. Teachers should
exercise professional judgment in arranging activities to cater for the interests and abilities of
their students.



Suggested Computational Physics activities
This part suggests computational physics activities through which targets on offering
opportunities for students to build computational models within the topic. They are for
teachers’ reference only and not mandatory. Teachers should exercise professional judgment


                                               21
in arranging activities to cater for the interests and abilities, particularly the computing
competency, of their students.


Science, Technology, Society and Environment (STSE) connections and socio-scientific
issues (SSI)
This part suggests activities with high students’ daily relevancy, helping them to connect
physics knowledge to technology, society and the environment around them. It is to nurture
students’ positive values and attitudes to apply physical laws and theories, concepts and skills
to discuss, investigate and solve everyday problem, so to build positive values and attitude.
Teachers should exercise professional judgment in selecting SSI to be relevant and interesting
to their students.



Core and extension
The curriculum content is designed with Core and Extension component part to cater for
students of different abilities and needs. The contents in Core cover the fundamental concepts
while that in extension are considered cognitively more demanding. The underlined text
represents the extension component.




                                              22
2.3.3     Curriculum Contents


Classical Physics
1. Mechanics
Overview
Mechanics is a fundamental field in Physics since the Ancient Age, the Greek philosopher
Aristotle proposed heavier objects fall faster. After over thousand years, the Italian physicist
Galileo Galilei queried Aristotelian physics through his thought experiment and Leaning
Tower of Pisa experiment, showing that the acceleration due to gravity is independent of
objects’ mass. Students are encouraged to understand how scientific knowledge was
developed by evidence and observations through experiments.

Newton developed a sort of laws, later known as Newtonian Mechanics, to describe the motion
of an object and the forces on it. Through studying Newtonian Mechanics, students can learn
modeling of statics, kinematics and dynamics using graphical and algebraic methods. Another
fundamental concept in Classical Mechanics, law of conservation of energy in a closed system,
is introduced through studying mechanical work done as a process of energy transfer, and
deriving kinetic energy and gravitational potential energy. The study of motion is extended
to projectile motion, circular motion, and simple harmonic motion. The concepts of mass,
weight and gravitational force are extended to an investigation of gravitation.

To relate mechanics with technology, society and the environment, students apply the concept
of power and energy efficiency in various machines and vehicles. Students also learn how to
compute quantities such as momentum and energy in examples involving collisions. The
relationship among the change in the momentum of a body, impact time and impact force is
emphasised. In addition, students can explore various kinds of oscillations and resonance
phenomena in daily life.



Nature of Science
➢ Isaac Newton inferred the Universal Law of Gravitation from the observations by Johannes
  Kepler, who observed the relationship between the period and semi-major axis of celestial
  bodies. Teacher can specify that scientific knowledge is based on observations, while
  inferences also played an important role in formulating a law or theory.




                                               23
Students should learn        Students should be able to


a.   Vector and scalar       •   describe the change of position of objects in terms of

                                 distance and displacement

                             •   distinguish between vector and scalar quantities

                             •   use scalars and vectors to represent physical quantities



b.   Kinematics              •   define velocity as the rate of change of displacement
                                       s
                                  v=
                                       t
•    Motion graphs
                             •   define acceleration as the rate of change of velocity
•    Uniform motion
                                       v
                                  a=
                                       t
•    Uniformly accelerated
                             •   define average speed as the distance travelled in a given
     motion
                                 period of time and average velocity as the displacement
•    vertical motion under
                                 changed in a period of time
     gravity
                             •   distinguish between instantaneous and average
•    Air resistance
                                 speed/velocity

                             •   present information on displacement-time (s-t) graphs,

                                 velocity-time (v-t) graphs and acceleration-time (a-t) graphs

                                 for moving objects

                             •   determine displacement, velocity and acceleration from

                                 motion graphs

                             •   apply equations of uniformly accelerated motion to solve

                                 problems

                                 v = u + at

                                 s = 12(u + v)t


                                              24
Students should learn             Students should be able to


                                      s = ut + 12at2
                                      v2= u2 + 2as

                                  •   interpret the uniform motion and uniformly accelerating

                                      motions of objects using algebraic and graphical methods

                                  •   state the acceleration due to gravity of free-falling object is

                                      approximately constant near the Earth surface

                                  •   estimate the acceleration due to gravity experimentally

                                  •   solve problems involving the vertical motion of free-falling

                                      objects using equations of uniformly accelerated motion and

                                      motion graphs

                                  •   describe the effect of air resistance on the motion of objects

                                      falling under gravity




c.   Force and motion             •   use free-body diagrams to represent the forces acting on

                                      objects
•    Addition and resolution of
                                  •   find the vector sum of coplanar forces graphically and
     forces
                                      algebraically
•    Newton’s Laws of motion
                                  •   resolve a force graphically and algebraically into
•    Moment of a force
                                      components along two mutually perpendicular directions

                                  •   describe the meaning of inertia and its relationship to mass

                                  •   describe situations in which objects are at rest or in uniform

                                      motion using Newton’s First Law of motion




                                                25
Students should learn            Students should be able to


                                 •   describe situations in which objects are accelerated under the

                                     effect of a net force (F=ma) using Newton’s Second Law

                                     of motion

                                 •   state Newton’s Third Law of motion and identify action and

                                     reaction pair of forces

                                 •   apply Newton’s Laws of motion to solve problems involving

                                     motion in one dimension

                                 •   define moment of force as the product of the force and its

                                     perpendicular distance from the pivot

                                 •   describe the effect of torque on a rigid body

                                 •   state the conditions for the equilibrium of forces acting on a

                                     rigid body and solve problems involving a fixed pivot

                                 •   interpret the centre of gravity and determine it

                                     experimentally



d.   Work, energy and power •        interpret mechanical work done as a way of energy transfer

                                 •   define mechanical work as W = Fscos
•    Mechanical work
                                                      1
•    Gravitational potential     •   derive K.E. = 2 mv2 and P.E. = mgh

                                                                                        W
     energy (P.E.)               •   define power as the rate of energy transfer, P = t

•    Kinetic energy (K.E.)       •   state the law of conservation of energy

•    Law of conservation of      •   define energy efficiency as the ratio of the amount of useful

     energy in a closed system       energy/power output to energy/power input, and apply it to

•    Power and efficiency            solve problems

                                                 26
Students should learn         Students should be able to


                              •   solve problems involving mechanical work, rate of energy

                                  transfer, conservation of energy and energy conversions with

                                  consideration of energy loss




e.   Momentum                 •    realise momentum as a quantity of motion of an object and

                                   define momentum p = mv
•    Linear momentum
                              •    describe a net force acting on an object for a period of time
•    Change in momentum and
                                   results in a change in momentum (impulse)
     net force
                              •    relate net force to rate of change of momentum based on
•    Law of conservation of
                                   Newton’s Second Law of motion
     linear momentum
                              •    describe the law of conservation of momentum and relate it

                                   to Newton’s Third Law of motion

                              •    distinguish between elastic and inelastic collisions

                              •    solve problems involving momentum in one dimension



f.   Projectile motion        •    describe the shape of the path taken by a projectile

                                   launched horizontally or at an angle of projection

                              •    describe the independence of horizontal and vertical

                                   motions

                              •    solve problems involving projectile motion




g.   Periodic motion          •    define angular displacement  using radian as unit



                                             27
Students should learn       Students should be able to


•   kinematics in uniform   •    define angular velocity  as the rate of change of angular

    circular motion                                 
                                 displacement  =
                                                    t
•   centripetal force
                            •    relate tangential velocity v to angular velocity by
•   kinematics in Simple
                                 v = r
    Harmonic Motion (SHM)   •    relate period, frequency and angular velocity by

•   forced oscillation,          T=
                                      1 2
                                        =
                                      f   
    damping and resonance
                            •    state centripetal acceleration as a vector pointing towards

                                                                                     v2
                                 the centre of uniform circular motion and apply a = r =

                                 r2 to solve problems

                            •    realise the centripetal force of a uniform circular motion as

                                 the resultant force and solve problems

                            •    define SHM as motions that acceleration a and

                                 displacement x are related by a  −x

                            •    describe SHM in terms of displacement, velocity,

                                 acceleration, period and frequency

                            •    present information on displacement-time graph for SHM

                            •    identify SHM and forced oscillation, and recognise the

                                 occurrence of damping and resonance in daily life

                            •    relate displacement of SHM with angular frequency,

                                 amplitude and time using trigonometric functions and solve

                                 problems




                                          28
 Students should learn            Students should be able to


 h.    Gravitation                •    state Newton’s law of universal gravitation

                                            𝐺𝑀𝑚
                                       F=
                                             𝑟2


                                  •    define gravitational field strength as force per unit mass

                                          F
                                       g= m

                                  •    determine the gravitational field strength at a point above a

                                       celestial body

                                  •    solve problems related to gravitational force, gravitational

                                       field and circular orbits of celestial bodies


Key practical Tasks
     determine the velocity and acceleration of a moving object
     find the acceleration due to gravity of an object
     examine the vector nature of forces
     determine the angular velocity of a uniform circular motion (e.g. a whirling rubber
      bung/rotating disc)



Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
     investigate the factors affecting frictional force, such as the mass, magnitude of applied
      force and contact surface area
     verify Newton’s second law of motion (F = ma) experimentally
     examine conservation of mechanical energy of toy roller coaster/simple pendulum
     determine the output power of an electric motor by measuring the rate of energy transfer
     estimating the work required for various tasks, such as lifting a book, stretching a spring
      and climbing Lantau Peak
     estimating the K.E. of various moving objects such as a speeding car, a sprinter and an
      air molecule
     investigate the application of conservation principles in designing energy transfer
      devices


                                                  29
   evaluate the design of energy transfer devices, such as household appliances, lifts,
    escalators and bicycles
   measure the change of momentum and force acting on objects during a collision
   perform monkey and hunter experiment to demonstrate the independence of horizontal
    and vertical motions in projectile motion
   demonstrate the simple harmonic motion as projection of uniform circular motion
                                                                                  l
   find the acceleration due to gravity using simple pendulum method (T=2       g
                                                                                      )

   investigate the factors affecting the period of a simple harmonic motion
   demonstrate the force oscillation and resonance phenomena (e.g. Barton’s pendulums,
    spring-mass system vibrated with signal generator)
   discuss the applications of damping in daily life
   study the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge that due to its lack of sufficient
    damping factors to counteract the forced oscillations
   search some natural phenomena that make use of the principle of resonance
   use dimensional analysis to check the numerical result of a Mechanics problem
   challenge their preconceived ideas on motion and force by posing appropriate thought-
    provoking questions (e.g. “zero” acceleration at the maximum height and “zero”
    gravitational force in space shuttle)
   contrast the application of Newton’s Laws of motion with conservation laws in solving
    problems in motion, in order to increase students’ awareness of the power and elegance
    of the conservation laws


Suggested Computational Physics activities
   use motion video analysis software or Apps to analyse different kinds of motions
   use computer to program and simulate some motions (e.g. free fall on different planets,
    projectile motion with or without air resistance, SHM with or without damping)


STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   discuss the relationship between energy efficiency, environment and sustainable
    development
   discuss the dilemma for modern transportation in choosing between speed and safety;
    and between convenience and environmental protection
   compare the emission of carbon/energy consumption per people in using private cars
    versus massive transport


                                             30
   investigate the danger of speeding and its relation to the chances of serious injury or
    death in car accidents can be related to the concepts of momentum and energy
   evaluate the safety design of vehicles (e.g. seatbelts, airbags, crash test)
   discuss the use of principles in mechanics in traffic accident investigations
   search and discuss the advancement of national technology in transports (e.g. high speed
    train, low carbon power source vehicles)
   discuss the use of technological devices including terrestrial and space vehicles (e.g.
    Shenzhou spacecraft)
   evaluate the technological design of modern transport (e.g. airbags in cars, tread patterns
    on car tyres, hybrid vehicles, magnetically levitated trains)
   suggest improvements to the recreational activities and sports equipment with the
    support of principles in mechanics
   explore the careers that require an understanding and application of kinematics and
    dynamics




                                              31
2. Thermal Physics
Overview
This topic examines the concept of thermal energy and transfer processes which are crucial for
the maintenance and quality of our lives. Students should learn the conservation of energy in
the heat transfer processes. The energy required to change the states of an object is usually
much higher than that for temperature change of an object in the same state. Through
comparing their values of energy transfer, students could build sense in the order of magnitude.

Attention should be paid on the microscopic interpretations of various phenomena, particularly
the relationships among temperature, internal energy and energy transfer. Students are
encouraged to understand the random nature for the motion of molecules under kinetic theory.
Emphasis should be put in understanding the distributions and average values of speed and
kinetic energy among molecules, such that these are an introductory idea to statistical physics.



Nature of Science
➢    James Clerk Maxwell made foundational contributions to the kinetic theory of gases; he
     proposed that molecules travel in straight lines until they collide, a hypothesis that
     naturally led to the derivation of the distribution of molecular speeds. Ludwig Boltzmann
     extended Maxwell's work by generalising the energy distribution among molecules and
     providing a statistical basis for the laws of thermodynamics. Together, these two scientists
     revealed the microscopic motions of gas molecules, paving the way for the future
     development of quantum mechanics and statistical physics. Using these models of thermal
     physics, teachers should emphasise how microscopic molecular theory can be utilised to
     explain macroscopic phenomena..



 Students should learn                  Students should be able to


 a. Heat transfer                       •   realise temperature as the degree of hotness of an

      •    Heat and internal energy         object

      •    Heat capacity and specific   •   interpret temperature as a quantity associated with the

           heat capacity                    average kinetic energy due to the random motion of

                                            molecules in a system


                                                32
Students should learn               Students should be able to


                                    •   define heat as the energy transferred as a result of the

                                        temperature difference between two objects

                                    •   describe two objects are in thermal equilibrium using

                                        zeroth law of thermodynamics

                                    •   describe the effect of mass, temperature and state of

                                        matter on the internal energy of a system

                                    •   relate internal energy to the sum of the kinetic energy

                                        of random motion and the potential energy of

                                        molecules in the system

                                                                   Q
                                    •   define heat capacity C =      and specific heat
                                                                   T
                                                         Q
                                        capacity c =
                                                        mT

                                    •   determine the specific heat capacity of a substance

                                    •   realise the practical importance of high specific heat

                                        capacity of water

                                    •   solve problems involving heat capacity and specific

                                        heat capacity




b. Change of State                  •   realise the change of states of matter at melting point

    •    Latent heat and specific       and boiling point

         latent heat                •   realise latent heat as the energy transfer during the

    •    Evaporation                    change of state without temperature change




                                            33
Students should learn        Students should be able to


                             •   interpret latent heat in terms of the change of potential

                                 energy of the molecules during a change of state

                                                                              𝑄
                             •   define specific latent heat of fusion 𝑙𝑓 =       and
                                                                              𝑚

                                                     𝑄
                                 vaporisation 𝑙𝑣 =       and solve related problems
                                                     𝑚


                             •   explain the occurrence of evaporation below boiling

                                 point, the cooling effect and factors affecting the rate

                                 of evaporation in terms of molecular motion



c. Gases                     •   state Boyle’s law (p-V relationship), pressure law (p-T

    •      General gas law       relationship) and Charles’ law (V-T relationship) of a

    •      Kinetic theory        gas

                             •   determine absolute zero by the extrapolation of

                                 pressure-temperature or volume-temperature

                                 relationships

                             •   use Kelvin as a temperature scale

                             •   combine the three relationships (p-V, p-T and V-T) of a

                                                                pV
                                 gas to obtain the relationship T =constant

                             •   solve problems involving the general gas law pV=nRT

                             •   realise the random motion of molecules in a gas

                             •   realise gas pressure resulted from molecular

                                 bombardment on container wall




                                       34
 Students should learn               Students should be able to


                                     •   relate macroscopic quantity temperature with

                                         microscopic quantity average molecular kinetic energy

                                                            3𝑅𝑇
                                         by K.E average =
                                                            2𝑁𝐴


                                     •   interpret the change of temperature from the Maxwell-

                                         Boltzmann distribution

                                     •   solve problems involving kinetic theory



Key practical Tasks
   Determine the specific heat capacity of a substance (e.g. water, metal block)
   Determine the specific latent heat of fusion and vaporization of water
   Examine Boyle’s law of a gas



Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
   calibrate a thermometer and reproduce fixed points on the Celsius scale
   use mixture method to estimate specific heat capacity of a substance
   perform experiments to study the cooling curve of a melted substance and determine its
    melting point
   determine factors affecting the rate of evaporation
   examine pressure-temperature and volume-temperature relationships of a gas and
    determine the absolute zero experimentally
   observe the random motion of molecules inside a smoke cell using a microscope and
    video camera
   use mechanical gas model to simulate gas molecules movements and explain gas laws



Suggested Computational Physics activities
   simulate random walk of molecules
   simulate motions of gas molecules inside a container and illustrate Maxwell-Boltzmann
    distribution


                                             35
STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   study the significance of high specific heat capacity of water in contributing the lives of
    a planet
   study the crucial row of ocean flow in restraining the temperature range around the
    world
   apply the concepts of heat capacity and latent heat in different weather phenomena
   read the sustainable development goals and the international treaty on climate change to
    understand the connections between science, technology, society and environment




                                              36
3. Waves
Overview
This topic examines the basic nature and properties of waves. Students are encouraged to
connect from the motions of point mass in mechanics to a chain of oscillations in wave motions.
Many motions in mechanics transmit energy from one place to another, together with the
transfer of matter. In contrast, traveling waves as means of transmitting energy without
transferring matter. The foundations for describing wave motion with physics terminology
are laid, including graphical representations of waves and simple wave diagrams. The basic
properties and characteristics displayed by waves are examined through observing water waves;
reflection, refraction, diffraction and interference are studied.

Two common kinds of waves, light and sound, are to be studied in details. The characteristics
of visible light as a part of the electromagnetic spectrum are studied. Sound as an example of
longitudinal waves is examined and its general properties are compared with those of light
waves. Students also learn about ultrasound. The general descriptions of musical notes are
related to the terminology of waves and the phenomena of resonance in musical instruments
would also be studied.

Nature of Science
➢     In the 17th century, Isaac Newton made foundation to optics such that light was regarded
      as particles-like rays. His principle can explain how light rays reflected, refracted and
      dispersed. However, Thomas Young performed double-slit experiment that showed
      interference pattern of light in 1801, such that particle-like rays cannot explain this wave
      property. Teacher can emphasise scientific principles, theories or laws are subject to be
      revised based on new evidence.



 Students should learn            Students should be able to


 a.    Nature of waves            •    recognise wave motion in terms of oscillation

                                  •    realise travelling waves as transmitting energy without
 •     Wave motion and
                                       transferring matter
       propagation
                                  •    relate wave energy to amplitude
 •     Traveling waves and

       stationary waves           •    distinguish between transverse and longitudinal waves



                                                37
Students should learn      Students should be able to


                           •    describe wave motion in terms of waveform, crest, trough,

                                compression, rarefaction, wavefront, phase, displacement,

                                amplitude, period, frequency, wavelength and wave speed

                           •    describe the superposition of traveling waves and the

                                formation of a stationary wave (transverse wave only)

                           •    interpret displacement-time and displacement-distance graphs

                                for travelling waves and stationary waves (transverse wave

                                only)

                           •    apply v = f to solve problems




b.   Properties of waves   •    describe the reflection of waves at a plane

                                barrier/reflector/surface
•    Reflection
                           •    examine the condition for a phase change on reflection
•    Refraction
                           •    describe the refraction of waves across a plane boundary of
•    Diffraction
                                different media
•    Interference
                           •    realise the change in wave speeds during refraction and

                                define refractive index in terms of wave speeds

                           •    describe the diffraction of waves through a narrow gap and

                                around a corner

                           •    examine the effect of width of slit on the degree of

                                diffraction




                                          38
Students should learn            Students should be able to


                                 •    describe the interference of waves resulted from

                                      superposition

                                 •    distinguish between constructive and destructive

                                      interferences of waves

                                 •    examine the interference of waves from two coherent

                                      sources

                                 •    determine the conditions for constructive and destructive

                                      interferences in terms of path difference

                                 •    draw wavefront diagrams to show the properties of waves



c.   Light waves                 •    state that the speed of light and electromagnetic wave in a

                                      vacuum is 3.0  108 m s-1
•    Reflection and refraction
                                 •    state the range of wavelengths for visible light and other
•    Polarisation, diffraction
                                      parts of the electromagnetic spectrum
     and interference
                                 •    examine the polarisation of light as an evidence for light as
•    Intensity
                                      transverse wave

                                 •    realise reflection and refraction as the wave properties of

                                      light

                                 •    realise the occurrence of total internal reflection of light and

                                      its daily applications

                                 •    realise diffraction and interference as evidences for the wave

                                      nature of light




                                                39
Students should learn           Students should be able to


                                •    examine the interference pattern in the Young’s double slit

                                     experiment

                                •    examine the diffraction pattern when light passes through the

                                     plane transmission grating

                                •    define intensity as power per unit area in classical wave

                                     theory

                                •    recognise the intensity distribution of the fringe pattern in

                                     the Young’s double slit experiment

                                •    discuss daily applications of light and electromagnetic waves

                                     using properties of waves

                                •    apply dsinθ = n to solve problems related to light source

                                     passing through a plane transmission grating

                                                D
                                •    apply y = a to estimate the wavelength of the light

                                     source used in the Young’s double slit experiment



d.   Sound waves                •    realise sound as an example of longitudinal waves and

                                     possesses the properties of waves
•    Wave properties in sound
                                •    realise that sound can exhibit reflection, refraction,
•    Audible frequency
                                     diffraction and interference
•    Musical notes
                                •    compare the general properties of sound waves and those of

                                     electromagnetic waves

                                •    realise the existence of ultrasound beyond the audible

                                     frequency range

                                               40
 Students should learn          Students should be able to


                                •    discuss the applications of ultrasound in ranging, cleaning

                                     and imaging

                                •    compare musical notes using pitch, loudness and quality in

                                     terms of waveforms

                                •    relate frequency and amplitude with the pitch and loudness

                                     of a note respectively

                                •    recognise the role of resonance in producing sound in

                                     musical instruments



Key practical Tasks
   illustrate stationary wave at different frequencies (e.g. string, Kundt’s tube) and estimate
    the wave speed
   determine wavelength of monochromatic source using plane transmission grating
   examine the inverse square law of intensity of light
   receive radio/microwave signals from artificial and natural objects for simple data
    analysis



Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
   demonstrate transverse wave and longitudinal wave using long spring
   illustrate phase change on reflection using a slinky spring
   perform ripple tank experiment to observe properties of waves
   study the factors affecting the properties of waves in water waves, microwaves or sound
    waves
   illustrate the superposition of two pulses using slinky spring
   illustrate the superposition of transverse wave using oscilloscope
   examine the conditions for constructive and destructive interference from two coherent
    sources
   examine polarisation of light using polarisers



                                              41
   determine the effects of wavelengths, slit separation or slit-screen distance on an
    interference pattern in double slit experiment
   examine fringe pattern using Young’s double slits and estimate the wavelength of the
    monochromatic light source
   determine audible frequency range experimentally and examine the existence of
    ultrasound
   use mobile App to measure loudness and pitch, and study the interference pattern of
    sound
   demonstrate resonance of sound waves (e.g. resonance box, water xylophone)
   observe an ultrasound image of body organs and gather information
   demonstrate the principles of pulse-echo using ultrasound transmitters and receivers
   design and make a distancing device using sonic sensor



Suggested Computational Physics activities
   simulate superposition of transverse waves
   simulate the formation of stationary wave



STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   study the impact of discovery of electromagnetic waves to the technological advances in
    the various area, including telecommunications and smart living
   participate amateur radio direction finding (ARDF) activity to appreciate the use of radio
    in sport and promote healthy lifestyle
   investigate the medical use in related to physical principles, such as endoscope,
    transducer, X-ray scanning and CT scanning
   explore the application of electromagnetic waves found in household, such as Wifi
    transmitters, sensors of remote controls and smart camera
   discuss the dilemma of convenient information exchanges and the protection of privacy
    upon the rapid developing telecommunication technology




                                              42
4. Electricity and Magnetism
Overview
This topic examines the basic principles of electricity and magnetism. The inter-relationships
among charges, current, voltage, resistance, energy and power are examined. With the
introduction of Kirchhoff’s laws for the concepts of conservation, the foundation for basic
circuitry is laid. The abstract concept of an electric field is introduced through its relationship
with the electrostatic force.

The concept of magnetic field is applied to the study of electromagnetism. The magnetic
effects of electric current and some simple magnetic field patterns are studied. Students also
learn the factors that affect the strength of an electromagnet. A magnetic force is produced
when a current-carrying conductor is placed in a magnetic field. An electric motor requires
the supply of electric current to the coil in a magnetic field to produce a turning force causing
it to rotate.

Nature of Science
➢     Charles-Augustin de Coulomb performed experiments involved the use of a torsion
      balance, a sensitive device that could measure the attractive and repulsive forces between
      charged objects. In 1785, he formulated Coulomb's law, which describes the electrostatic
      force obeys the inverse square law between two point-charges. His work introduced the
      concept of the inverse square law, which shared an incredibly similar mathematical
      structure with Newton's law of gravitation that developed about 100 years ago in 1687.
      Teachers can emphasis the importance of understanding laws/theory developed from
      former scientists to formulate new knowledge.



 Students should learn            Students should be able to


 a.   Electric current, electric •     define electric current as the rate of net flow of electric

      potential, and resistance        charges

                                  •    distinguish between the convention for the direction of

                                       electric current and the flow of electrons

                                  •    define the electric potential difference (p.d.)/voltage

                                       between two points in a circuit as the electric potential


                                                 43
Students should learn           Students should be able to


                                     energy converted to other forms per unit charge passing

                                     between the points outside the source

                                •    define the electromotive force (e.m.f.) of a source as the

                                     energy imparted by the source per unit charge passing

                                     through it

                                                             V                     RA
                                •    define resistance R =     and resistivity  =
                                                             I                      l

                                •    identify the variation of current with the applied p.d.

                                     between ohmic and non-ohmic conductors




b.   Simple circuits and        •    state Kirchhoff’s current law (I=0) and voltage law

     electrical power                (V=0)

                                •    compare series and parallel circuits in terms of p.d. across
•    Kirchhoff’s Laws
                                     components of each circuit and the current through them
•    Equivalent resistance in
                                •    derive the resistance combinations in series and parallel
     series and parallel
                                        R = R1 + R2 + … for resistors connected in series
     circuits
                                        1   1    1
•    Internal resistance                R = R1 + R2 +…for resistors connected in parallel

•    Electrical power           •    assign the electric potential of any earthed points as zero

     dissipation                •    compare the e.m.f. of a source and the terminal voltage

                                     across the source experimentally and relate the difference to

                                     the internal resistance of the source

                                •    state the power dissipation P in a simple circuit

                                                                 V2
                                •    derive P = VI, P= I2R and P=
                                                                  R

                                               44
Students should learn          Students should be able to


                               •    solve problems involving simple circuits



c.   Electrostatics            •    examine the evidence for two kinds of charges in nature

                               •    realise the attraction and repulsion between charges
•    Electric charges
                               •    interpret charging and discharging in terms of electron
•    Coulomb’s law
                                    transfer
•    Electric field
                                                               Q1Q2
•    Electric field strength   •    state Coulomb’s law F =
                                                               4 or2

                               •    solve problems involving forces between point charges

                               •    describe the electric field around a point charge and between

                                    parallel charged plates

                               •    represent an electric field using field lines

                               •    explain how charges interact via an electric field

                               •    define electric field strength at a point as the force per unit

                                    charge on a positive test charge placed at that point

                               •    state electric field strength around a point charge by

                                           Q                                           V
                                    E=              and between parallel plates by E = d and
                                         4 or 2



                                    solve related problems




d.   Magnetic field            •    examine the magnetic field pattern in the region around a

                                    permanent magnet
•    Magnetic force and
                               •    describe the behaviour of a compass in a magnetic field
     magnetic field
                               •    represent magnetic field using field lines


                                               45
Students should learn       Students should be able to


•   Magnetic effect of      •    examine the magnetic field patterns associated with currents

    electric current             through a long straight wire, a circular coil and a long

•   Current-carrying             solenoid

    conductor in magnetic                    o I           oNI
                            •    apply B =
                                             2r
                                                 and B =      l    to represent the magnetic
    field
                                 fields around a long straight wire and inside a long

                                 solenoid carrying current respectively, and solve

                                 related problems

                            •    examine the existence of a force on a current-carrying

                                 conductor in a magnetic field and determine the relative

                                 directions of force, field and current

                            •    determine the factors affecting the force on a straight

                                 current-carrying wire in a magnetic field and represent the

                                 force by F = BIl sin

                            •    determine the turning effect on a current-carrying coil in a

                                 magnetic field

                            •    solve problems involving current-carrying conductors in a

                                 magnetic field

                            •    represent the force on a moving charge in a magnetic field

                                 by F = BQvsin and solve problems




                                            46
Key practical task
   compare the V-I graphs of ohmic and non-ohmic conductors
   determine internal resistance of a power source
   measure the magnetic field strengths around a long straight wire and/or inside a long
    solenoid carrying current using hall probe/search coil



Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
   examine a wire’s resistivity through investigating the factors affecting the resistance of a
    wire
   identify parallel or series circuit in a bread board
   design and construct a simple circuit to perform a simple function using bread board and
    electronic components
   examine attractive and repulsive force upon different kinds of charges
   show the nature of attraction and repulsion of charges using simple electrostatic
    generation and testing equipment
   demonstrate bouncing metal ball between uniform electric field (parallel metal plates
    connected with EHT must be handled with care)
   measure magnetic field strength by using simple current balance
   use virtual reality device to visualise electric field and magnetic field patterns
   examine the existence of a force on a current-carrying conductor in a magnetic field and
    determine the relative directions of force, field and current
   examine F = BIlsin by varying the length and current that affect the magnitude of the
    force
   demonstrate the deflection of electron beam by electric field and magnetic field using
    cathode ray tube
   read Maxwell’s story of the development on electromagnetism
   study the development in definition of Ampere so to appreciate the evolving nature of
    science


Suggested Computational Physics activities
   simulate the electric field or magnetic field patterns




                                              47
STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   compare the voltage and energy storage labeled on different brands and types of dry
    cells, and discuss their respective applications
   study the formation of auroras by describing how charged particles are guided along
    helical paths by magnetic field lines, so to appreciate the natural phenomena from our
    atmosphere to outer space in the realm of astrophysics




                                             48
Physics in daily life


5. Physics and Engineering
Overview
Engineering is a multidisciplinary field that applies scientific principles to solve complex
problems and develop innovative technologies. This part aims at understanding how physics
closely interconnected with engineering by introducing the use of design and optimisation of
systems, devices, and processes across electricity generation, power transmission and
aerospace engineering. Teachers should emphasise how the engineers leverage their expertise
to address challenges in authentic situations, focusing on application of physical concepts, cost-
effectiveness and efficiency. Students could appreciate the technological advancements,
innovative engineering solutions and make sure the process comply with safety standards and
regulations.

The structure of motor and generator is studied in terms of applying the principles of
electromagnetism and electromagnetic induction. Students learn how electricity is generated,
alternating current (a.c.) voltages are stepped up for transmission and stepped down with
transformers for domestic use. In addition to the practical use and safety of household
electricity, the applications of sensors for smart-living are also studied.

Our country’s aerospace technology has been developing rapidly in the recent decades. The
principles of fluid dynamics, gravitational potential energy and orbital motions are studied.
Through combing these physics concepts with practical engineering applications to national
flight and space exploration achievement, students enhance the appreciation to advanced
technology and national pride.



Nature of Science
➢    Thomas Alba Edison who advocated direct current (d.c.), and Nikola Tesla who was the
     proponent of alternating current (a.c.), began the "The War of the Currents" for the market
     share of electricity use. Teachers can use this to illustrate that while scientists adhere to
     shared scientific methods and values, they may still make biased decisions or lack
     objective evidence when faced with commercial interests and personal reputation, thereby
     reflecting the human element in the development of science.




                                               49
Students should learn             Students should be able to


a.   Electricity generation       •    examine induced e.m.f. resulting from a moving conductor

     and power transmission            in a steady magnetic field or a stationary conductor in a

                                       changing magnetic field
•    Electromagnetic
                                  •    apply Lenz’s law to determine the direction of induced
     induction
                                       e.m.f./current
•    Faraday’s Law
                                  •    define magnetic flux  = BAcos
•    Direct current (d.c.) and
                                                                    
     alternating current (a.c.)   •    state Faraday's Law  = −
                                                                     t
                                                                        and apply it to

•    Transformer and                   calculate the average induced e.m.f.

     electricity transmission     •    describe the structure of a simple d.c. motor, d.c. generators

                                       and a.c. generators and how they work

                                  •    discuss the occurrence and practical uses of eddy currents

                                  •    distinguish between the operating voltage/current and their

                                       peak values of an a.c. system

                                  •    describe the working principle of a simple transformer

                                                                                 Vp  Np
                                  •    relate the voltage ratio to turn ratio by V =    and apply
                                                                                  s       Ns

                                       it to solve problems

                                  •    examine methods for improving the efficiency of a

                                       transformer

                                  •    discuss the advantages of transmission of electrical energy

                                       with a.c. at high voltages

                                  •    describe various stages of stepping up and down of the

                                       voltage in a grid system for power transmission



                                                 50
Students should learn           Students should be able to


b.   Domestic electricity and   •    determine the power rating of electrical appliances

     smart living               •    determine the operating current for electrical appliances and

                                     discuss the choice of fuses
•    Power rating
                                •    use kilowatt-hour (kWh) as a unit of electrical energy
•    Safety in domestic
                                •    calculate the costs of running various electrical appliances
     electricity
                                •    discuss the choice of thickness of power cables with the
•    Light emitting diodes
                                     consideration of cost effectiveness and electricity safety
     (LED)
                                •    interpret the light emission of LED in terms of energy
•    Sensors
                                     change in atomic level and discuss its energy efficiency and

                                     endurance

                                •    recognise the basic working principle of common sensors

                                     that operate by detecting or measuring physical quantities

                                     and converting them to into electrical signals

                                •    discuss daily application of sensing devices for smart living

                                     environment

c.   Aerospace Science and      •    derive continuity equation vA=constant from the

     Engineering                     conservation of mass and solve related problems for

                                     incompressible fluid
•    Aircraft in fluid
                                •    recognise the role of Bernoulli’s principle and Coanda effect
•    Bernoulli’s equation
                                     in generating lifting force for aircraft
•    Launching to space

•    Aerospace technology
                                •    apply the Bernoulli’s equation

                                           1
                                     P+gh+2v2=constant to solve problems related

                                     to aircraft, including pitot tube

                                               51
 Students should learn         Students should be able to


                               •     apply Newton’s law of gravitation to explain motion of

                                     celestial bodies in circular orbits

                               •     distinguish the apparent weightlessness of a spacecraft

                                     between orbiting and traveling in space

                               •     interpret the meaning of gravitational potential energy and

                                                        GMm
                                     its expression U= −
                                                         r

                               •     apply conservation of mechanical energy to solve problems

                                     involving launching and motion of artificial celestial bodies

                                     or spacecraft

                               •     determine the escape velocity on a celestial body

                               •     recognise the diverse applications of satellites

                               •     appreciate the nation’s contributions to the development of

                                     aerospace technology




Key practical tasks
   design and construct an electric circuit, with the use of sensors, to perform a simple
    function design


Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
   investigate the factors affecting the magnitude of induced current/e.m.f. of a moving coil
    inside a magnetic field
   examine a transformer’s voltage ratio and turns ratio
                                   
   investigate Faraday’s law  = −    using signal generator across a solenoid and measure
                                    t
    the induced e.m.f. across a coil surrounding the solenoid using oscilloscope


                                               52
   gather and analyse information to identify how high tension cables are insulated from
    power pylons, protected from lightning strikes and cleaned from dirt
   demonstrate the conversion from mechanical energy to electrical energy using
    regenerative braking system
   demonstrate the heating and damping effect from eddy current
   compare the efficiency of cooking electrical appliances, such as microwave oven,
    electric heater and magnetic heater
   compare the power transmission among d.c. through cables and a.c. through stepping up
    and down of the voltage in a grid system
   build a circuit to generate electricity by solar energy or wind turbine
   demonstrate Bernoulli’s effect using water flow through pitot tube or horizontal tube
    with a narrow section
   demonstrate the Coanda effect of curved surface under a fluid in motion (e.g. wind blow
    to circular cup, spoon under water stream)
   investigate the shapes of air foil affecting the uplifting force under air stream
   investigate the angle of attack against the uplifting force on air foil under air stream
   design and make an aircraft model using 3D printer
   search for the information on home-developed aircraft C919
   compare the working principles of helicopter, drone, hot air balloon and aircraft , and
    analyse their characteristics in connection with their functions
   carry out an energy audit on their own homes or schools – for example, measuring
    amount of electrical energy used at home in a month by reading the electricity bill and
    estimating what proportion of this energy is used for lighting, air-conditioning, heating
    water and cooking
   gather and analyse the use of sensors on their own homes or schools and study how the
    data transmitted and processed through computing and cloud systems for smart living
   construct models related to national aerospace technology, such as Long March rocket,
    Shenzhou spacecraft and Beidou satellite
   read the national space exploration projects (e.g. scientific research in Tiangong, Lunar
    and Mars exploration)
   read the story of Hong Kong’s first astronaut entering Tiangong space station, such as
    the intensive training before launching and the role of payload expert
   visit to museums/sites related to aerospace technology (e.g. HK Space Museum,
    Government Flying Service, Guangdong Aerospace Research Academy)




                                              53
Suggested Computational Physics activities
   simulate the orbital motions of celestial bodies



STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   compare the functions, cost and energy efficiency of LED with other kinds of light
    sources such as incandescent lamps (e.g. filament light bulb, halogen lamp) and gas
    discharge lamps (e.g. linear or compact fluorescent lamp, high pressure mercury or
    sodium lamp, induction lamp)
   study the Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme (EELS) in Hong Kong and information
    contained in Energy Labels
   gather and compare information related to end-use energy efficiency for air conditioners,
    lamps and cars
   study the recent development of national aerospace technology and the implication to
    society (e.g. low altitude economy, space economy)
   discuss the space competition and collaboration among different countries




                                              54
6. Physics and society

Overview
Physics is deeply embedded in our daily lives, influencing everything from the time we wake
up to the way we communicate. Radioactivity and sustainable development are the crucial
concepts that are not intuitive but highly influencing to our daily life. Radioactive isotopes
are widely used in medical purpose and nuclear power, while high standard of safety measures
should be maintained to minimise potential hazards or any disaster that may lead to panic.
Nuclear power and renewable energy sources are crucial for combating climate change and
achieving sustainable development goals. They offer clean and increasingly competitive
energy alternatives to fossil fuels, which not only target for carbon neutrality but also lower
costs upon the advancing technology levels.

Physics-related expertise promotes technology advancements for improving our lives.
Students are encouraged to explore how researchers and engineers contribute to the discovery
of physics knowledge and technological breakthrough. In addition, various kinds of Physics-
trained expertise are able to apply modelling skills to simulate various situations for problem
solving in financial analytics, social interactions and complex systems.

Nature of Science
➢     Scientists worked in close cooperation with engineers during the Manhattan Project in
      World War II (WWII). The successful construction of atomic bomb led to an end of
      WWII. Teachers can emphasis how science and technology influenced each other in the
      development of nuclear weapon during WWII, and later nuclear power serves as a kind
      of clean and low carbon emission energy source.



 Students should learn           Students should be able to


 a.   Radiation and              •    realise X-rays as ionising electromagnetic radiations of

      radioactivity                   short wavelengths with high penetrating power

                                 •    realise the emission of X-rays when fast electrons hit a
 •     X-rays
                                      heavy metal target
 •     ,  and  radiations
                                 •    discuss the medical and security use of X-rays
 •     Radioactive decay
                                 •    describe the origin and nature of ,  and  radiations

                                               55
Students should learn        Students should be able to


•   Detection of radiation   •    compare ,  and  radiations in terms of their penetrating

•   Radiation safety              power, ranges, ionising power, behaviour in electric field

•   Radioactive isotopes          and magnetic field, and cloud chamber tracks

                             •    realise the occurrence of radioactive decay in unstable

                                  nuclides and its random nature

                             •    state the proportional relationship between the activity of a

                                  sample and the number of undecayed nuclei

                             •    define half-life as the period of time over which the number

                                  of radioactive nuclei decreases by a factor of one-half

                             •    determine the half-life of a radioisotope from its decay

                                  graph or from numerical data

                             •    realise the existence of background radiation

                             •    know the methods in detecting radiations using

                                  photographic film and GM counter

                             •    interpret radiation in terms of count rate using a GM

                                  counter

                             •    represent radiation equivalent dose using the unit Sievert

                                  (Sv)

                             •    discuss potential hazards of ionising radiation and suggest

                                  safety precautions in handling radioactive sources to

                                  minimise the radiation dose absorbed




                                            56
Students should learn          Students should be able to


                               •    define atomic number as the number of protons in the

                                    nucleus and mass number as the sum of the number of

                                    protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom

                               •    represent nuclides using symbolic notations

                               •    define isotope

                               •    realise the existence of radioactive isotopes in some

                                    elements

                               •    discuss the uses of radioactive isotopes for radiotherapy,

                                    thickness inspection, tracers and medical imaging

                               •    solve problems involving radioactivity and radioactive

                                    decay



b.   Energy sources and        •    recognise the needs and consideration for developing

     sustainable development        renewable and low carbon energy sources for achieving

                                    relevant sustainable development goals
•    Renewable and low
                               •    realise the release of energy in nuclear fission and fusion
     carbon energy sources
                               •    state mass-energy relationship E= mc2
•    Environmental impact of
                               •    use electron-volt (eV) and atomic mass unit as units of
     energy consumption
                                    energy
•    Carbon neutrality
                               •    apply E= mc2 to determine the energy release in nuclear

                                    reactions

                               •    realise nuclear chain reaction




                                             57
Students should learn   Students should be able to


                        •    describe the principle of the nuclear fission reactor and

                             state the roles of moderator, coolant and control rods

                        •    realise nuclear fusion as the source of solar energy

                        •    describe photovoltaic effect as the process for a semi-

                             conductor to generate voltage and electric current upon

                             exposure to light

                        •    define solar constant as the total electromagnetic radiation

                             energy radiated at normal incidence by the Sun per unit time

                             per unit area at the mean distance between the Earth and the

                             Sun measured outside the Earth’s atmosphere

                        •    solve problems involving the solar constant

                                                                        1
                        •    derive maximum power by wind turbine as P= 2 Av3 ,

                             where  is the efficiency, to solve problems

                        •    discuss the impact of extraction, conversion, distribution

                             and greenhouse gas emission in the use of energy on the

                             environment and society

                        •    discuss how the daily habits of individuals contribute

                             towards achieving carbon neutrality, so as to mitigate the

                             climate change

                        •    analyse the consumption data for different energy sources

                             in Hong Kong and their specific purposes

                        •    appreciate the nation’s contribution to the development of

                             renewable and low carbon energy sources

                                      58
 Students should learn            Students should be able to


 c.   Physics for recent and      •    realise the essential role of physicists and engineers in

      future                           fostering the development of a sustainable society

                                  •    appreciate various professions and specialists in applying
 •     Physics-related career
                                       physical models and simulations to solve authentic
 •     Physics and I&T
                                       problems

                                  •    appreciate the impact of discoveries in physics from history

                                       leading to modern technologies and recognise how

                                       emerging innovation and technology are shaping everyday

                                       life



Key practical tasks
     conduct Computational Physics experiment/use dice to simulate radioactive decay of
      isotope



Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
     measure background radiation using GM counter
     demonstrate the random variation of count rate by using GM counter and a radioactive
      source
     identify sources of natural radiations and investigate why exposure to natural radiation is
      increased for airline crews and passengers
     determine the factors leading to an increase in the concentration of radon in high-rise
      buildings
     read the specification for commercial products containing radiation, such as smoke
      detectors
     assess the risks and benefits of using nuclear radiations in medical diagnosis
     search the process of handling radioactive wastes in Hong Kong
     estimate the half-life from a graph of activity plotted against time
     search for information on the use of radioactive dating, radioactive tracers, food
      irradiation and product sterilization
                                                59
   discuss the worth and risks of using X-rays, ultrasound and radionuclides for patients
   search and discuss for the information on the ethics of developing and using nuclear
    weapons
                                                          1
   examine the efficiency of wind power generator with P=2Av3

   examine the photovoltaic effect of solar cell
   study complex systems to simulate a social or natural issue, such as crowd control and
    forest fire
   organise or participate competition on solar cooker, wind power generation, solar car
    race or hydrogen car race
   study the resonance effect results from the interaction between electromagnetic waves of
    particular wavelengths and greenhouse gases
   study the most recent scientific development of nuclear fission and fission for nuclear
    power generation
   visit to low carbon energy source centre
   visit local power plants and the nuclear power plants in our country (e.g. Daya Bay)
   participate the talks conducted by speakers from the Electrical and Mechanical Services
    Department, Green Power, CLP Power Hong Kong Limited, Hong Kong Electric
    Company Limited, Towngas, MTR, or the Environment Protection Department to
    introduce the recent information on energy generation, transmission and consumption in
    society and alternative energy sources



Suggested Computational Physics activities
   simulate radioactive decay process



STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   search and analyse the data of carbon emission and the temperature change
   analyse the reasons causing the serious nuclear disasters in the history and study the
    enhanced safety standards of the new generation of nuclear power plants as well as the
    limitations and advantages of small modular reactor (SMR)
   debate for comparing the use of nuclear reactors with other methods of producing
    electrical power in terms of cost-effectiveness, sustainable development, potential
    hazards, etc.
   investigate how the enhancing technology improves the safety and enhances the
    abundance of possible nuclear power fuels

                                             60
   study the impact of extraction, conversion, distribution and use of energy on the
    environment and society, and their suitability for different situations
   discuss the ways to save electrical energy for reasons of economy and environmental
    protection
   discuss for the alternative generation and better use of electricity for more sustainable
    use in Hong Kong
   discuss a feasible plan for Hong Kong to achieve the goals of sustainable development




                                              61
Modern Physics


7. Quantum Physics
Overview
Quantum Physics refers to the study of physical phenomena at the small scales, such as atoms
and subatomic particles. The principles and theories that explaining microscopic world form
the basis for cutting-edge technologies, such as electron microscopes, semiconducting chips
and quantum computing.

Unlike classical physics, which are deterministic and causal in nature, quantum physics
embraces a probabilistic approach that precise predictions of particles’ physical parameters are
impossible. From the Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle, it is impossible to measure both the
exact position and the momentum of a particle simultaneously with precision. In addition,
energy in classical physics is observed to be continuous, meaning it can take on any value
within a given range in macroscopic level. However, quantum physics introduces the concept
of quantisation, asserting that the energy of quanta can only exist in discrete levels.
Furthermore, the concepts such as photoelectric effect, wave-particle duality, and quantum
superposition, demonstrate quantum properties that cannot be explained solely from classical
theories.

Nature of Science
➢     In late 19th century, physicists explored the properties of tiny substances, now known as
      quantum particles. They found that classical theory failed to explain some of the
      observations, such as line spectra and photoelectric effect. Teachers should emphasis
      scientific laws or theories are the subject to revision when there exists new evidence
      through the transition from classical to quantum physics.



 Students should learn           Students should be able to


 a.    Atomic Model              •   recognise JJ Thomson’s discovery of electron

                                 •   describe Rutherford’s construction of an atomic model

                                     consisting of a nucleus and electrons from the scattering

                                     experiments


                                               62
Students should learn              Students should be able to


                                   •   state the limitations of Rutherford’s atomic model in

                                       accounting for the line spectra



b.   Photoelectric effect          •   describe photoelectric effect experiment and its results

                                   •   state the limitations of the wave theory of light in explaining
•    Evidence for light quanta
                                       the photoelectric effect
•    Einstein’s interpretation
                                   •   state photons as light quanta and relate its energy to the
     of photoelectric effect and
                                       frequency using E=hf
     photoelectric equation
                                   •   describe how the intensity of light of a given frequency is

                                       related to the number of photons

                                   •   realise the photoelectric effect as the evidence of particle

                                       nature of light

                                   •   explain photoelectric effect using Einstein’s photoelectric

                                                         1
                                       equation hf –  = 2 mevmax2

                                   •   apply E=hf and Einstein’s photoelectric equation to solve

                                       problems



c.   Bohr’s atomic model of        •   describe the special features of line spectra of hydrogen

     hydrogen                          atoms and other monatomic gases

                                   •   realise line spectra as evidence of quantised energy levels
•    Discrete energy levels
                                   •   realise that the energy levels of a hydrogen atom are
•    Electron transition among
                                       quantised and can only take on certain discrete values
     energy levels
                                   •   explain spectral lines of hydrogen atoms in terms of electron

                                                  63
Students should learn        Students should be able to


•    Bohr’s equation of          transitions between energy levels

     electron energy of      •   distinguish between “quantum” and “classical” aspects in

     hydrogen atom               terms of quantisation of energy levels of Bohr’s atomic

                                 model of hydrogen

                             •   realise the daily applications of photon absorption and

                                 emission resulting from electron transitions between energy

                                 levels of specific materials (production of X-ray and

                                 quantum dots in RGB displays)

                             •   represent the energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom at nth

                                                            13.6 eV
                                 energy level as Etot = −      n2

                             •   distinguish ionisation and excitation energies

                                                           1     −13.6 eV 1    1
                             •   derive the expression         =         (b2 − a2 ) for
                                                          a→b      hc

                                 the wavelength  a → b of photon emitted or absorbed

                                 when undergoes electron transition between energy

                                 levels

                             •   interpret line spectra by the use of Bohr’s equation of

                                 electron energy

                                                      1         −13.6 eV 1      1
                             •   apply E = hf and           =           (   2 − 2 ) to solve
                                                    a→b           hc     b    a

                                 problems



d.   Wave-particle duality   •   realise the wave-particle duality of electrons and light

                             •   describe evidences of electrons and light exhibiting both
•    de Broglie formula

                                            64
Students should learn           Students should be able to


•    Rayleigh criterion             wave and particle properties

                                                                 h
                                •   apply de Broglie formula  = p to solve problems

                                    involving wave and particle properties of electrons

                                •   describe the limitations of optical microscope in observing

                                    substances of small scale

                                •   explain the advantage of high resolution of electron

                                    microscopes using de Broglie wavelength and Rayleigh

                                                                                     1.22
                                    criterion for minimum resolvable detail,         d



e.   Probabilistic nature and   •   realise the probabilistic nature of quantum particles

     Heisenberg’s uncertainty   •   realise the graphical representation of a quantum particle as

     principle                      normalised wave function (x) and the probability density at

                                    position x is |(x)|2
•    Quantum superposition
                                •   describe the superposition state of a quantum particle 
•    Measurement of a
                                    using |=a1|1 + a2|2, where |a1|2 and |a2|2 are the
     quantum particle
                                    probability of obtaining states |1 and |2 respectively
•    Heisenberg’s uncertainty
                                    (normalised states only, i.e. |a1|2+|a2|2=1)
     principle
                                •   describe the effect of measurement of a quantum particle

                                •   solve problems involving quantum superposition and

                                    measurement

                                •   realise the quantum tunnelling and discuss its application in

                                    scanning tunnelling electron microscope (STM)



                                               65
 Students should learn           Students should be able to


                                 •   state Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle

                                                     ℎ
                                 •   apply ∆𝑥∆𝑝 ≥ 4𝜋 to solve problems

                                 •   discuss the recent development and applications of quantum

                                     technology in various areas related to daily life (quantum

                                     computing, quantum cryptography and quantum

                                     communication)



Key practical tasks
   perform experiment using LED to estimate the value of Planck’s constant



Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
   perform an analogy activity to illustrate Rutherford’s construction of atomic model by
    using a ball passing through a black box
   examine the photoelectric effect of gold leaf using monochromatic sources with different
    intensity and frequency
   perform experiment on the photoelectric effect using photocell to measure the stopping
    potential of monochromatic light
   perform electron diffraction experiment using electron gun with lattice to study its
    diffraction pattern
   use electron gun with Helmholtz coils to perform experiment of deflection of electron to
    estimate the charge to mass ratio of electron
   search and study the images captured by electronic microscopes
   observe emission line spectra and/or absorption line spectra of particular elements using
    plane transmission grating
   study the working principle of TV displays in using RGB primary colour that different
    from the full colour spectrum of sunlight
   perform experiment to show how the diffraction patterns of two monochromatic point
    sources demonstrate the limit of resolution for visible light
   use analogy to understand the probabilistic behavior in quantum world (e.g. Schrodinger
    cat)
                                               66
   study the quantum tunnelling effect in radioactive decay and nuclear fusion occurring in
    the sun
   learn about scientists who contributed well to the development of quantum mechanics
    (e.g. J.J. Thomson, Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Ernest Rutherford, Niels Bohr, Louis de
    Broglie, Erwin Schrodinger and Werner Heisenberg)
   search and study the particle accelerator for researches in Atomic Physics, such as CERN,
    IHEP and SKEKB
   study the standard model of particle physics in explaining how the basic building blocks
    of matter interact and governed by four fundamental forces
   Visit to Hong Kong Science Museum for the exhibits about quantum technology
   Visit to Standards and Calibration Laboratory for the primary standards for physical
    measurements that make use of quantum effects (e.g. caesium beam atomic clock)



Suggested Computational Physics activities
    simulate the Rutherford scattering experiment



STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   study the principles of qubits in quantum computing and compare that with traditional
    computers
   explore the recent displays using quantum technology to appreciate how quantum
    technology improves the energy efficiency
   study the daily application of quantum technology and how their development changed
    our life
   study the latest development of quantum technology and discuss the possible impacts to
    society and economics




                                              67
8. Astrophysics and Relativity
Overview
Astrophysics is the study of universe with the applications of theory and laws of physics. It
encompasses a wide range of phenomena, from the behavior of stars to the mysteries of black
holes and dark matter. In addition, astrophysics offers theoretical framework, together with
the aerospace technological advancements, enable space exploration to become possible.
Students are given a brief introduction to the phenomena of the universe as seen in different
scales of space. They are exposed to realise different ways to observe in unravelling the
fundamental laws that govern the universe. Some basic properties and classifications of stars,
and the expansion of the universe are introduced.

Relativity, as proposed by Albert Einstein, denotes a cornerstone of modern physics. This
revolutionised Newtonian mechanics and explains the observed deviations from Newton’s Law
of Universal Gravitation. The principle of invariant light speed, length contraction and time
dilation in special relativity are evidenced by observation, such as decay of muon from cosmic.
For instance, satellite navigation systems must account for the relativistic effects for precise
timing to pinpoint locations.

Nature of Science
➢     Before 20th century, the universe was considered static and unchanging. In 1920s, Edwin
      Hubble’s observation using Hooker telescope revolutionised the understanding of the
      universe. With this powerful instrument, Hubble was able to observe distant galaxies
      and determine their distances, leading to the groundbreaking conclusion − the universe is
      expanding. Teachers can emphasise that this technological advancement enabled
      astronomers to gather data that challenged existing models and laid the foundation for
      modern cosmology.



 Students should learn             Students should be able to


 a.    Observing the sky           •   realise the use of different astronomical instruments in

                                       observing celestial bodies through visible spectrum and
 •     Instruments to observe
                                       beyond
       celestial bodies

 •     Structure of the universe



                                                68
Students should learn         Students should be able to


                              •   recognise the basic features and hierarchy of celestial bodies

                                  including solar system, star, star cluster, nebula, galaxy and

                                  cluster of galaxies

                              •   determine the distance of a celestial body using the method

                                  of parallax

                              •   define and use basic terminologies including light year,

                                  astronomical unit and parsec (pc) as units of distance used

                                  to describe the spatial scale




b.   Stars and the universe   •   describe the effect of surface temperature on the colour and

                                  luminosity of a star using blackbody radiation curves
•    Stellar luminosity
                              •   classify stars on the H-R diagram according to their
•    Hertzsprung-Russell
                                  luminosities and surface temperatures
     (H-R) diagram
                              •   state Stefan-Boltzmann law (P = AT4), and apply it to
•    Stefan-Boltzmann law
                                  derive the luminosity L=4R2T4 for a spherical blackbody
•    Doppler effect
                              •   estimate the relative size of stars using H-R diagram and

                                  Stefan-Boltzmann law

                              •   realise the existence of spectral lines in the spectra of stars

                                                                               vr
                              •   describe the Doppler effect and apply        = c to
                                                                            o

                                  determine the velocity of celestial bodies

                              •   explain the existence of dark matter inferred from the

                                  rotation curve of stars around galaxies



                                            69
 Students should learn                Students should be able to


                                      •   relate red shift to the expansion of the universe and infer to

                                          the Big Bang theory



 c.    Relativity                     • state the limitations of Newtonian Mechanics in terms of

                                          space and time
 •     Frames of reference
                                      • realise the laws of physics are valid in all inertial frames of
 •     Principle of invariant light
                                          reference
       speed
                                      • realise that light propagates through empty space with a
 •     Time dilation
                                          definite speed of light c = 3108 m s-1 is independent of the
 •     Length contraction
                                          speed of the source or observer
 •     Spacetime diagram
                                                                           ∆𝑡0
                                      • state the time dilation ∆𝑡 =              2
                                                                                      and length contraction
                                                                         √1−(𝑣)
                                                                             𝑐


                                                           𝑣 2
                                          l = lo√1 − ( ) , and apply them to solve problems
                                                           𝑐


                                      • use spacetime diagram to show the events occur and their

                                          light arrive across two distinct observers from different

                                          frames of reference

                                      • state the limitations of special relativity in accounting the

                                          effect of gravity, and appreciate the spacetime curvature

                                          model from Einstein’s General Relativity

                                      •   recognise the important role of relativistic effect in the

                                          satellite navigation systems



Key practical tasks
     measure distance of an object using parallax method

                                                      70
Suggested Learning and Teaching Activities
   construct a simple antenna and connect to SDR for receiving radio signals from different
    sources, such as remote microphone, aircrafts and celestial bodies
   study the evolution of stars and observe their positions from H-R diagram
   observe absorption line spectrum (e.g. Iodine vapor)
   observe spectra of celestial objects under telescope (e.g. H-alpha)
   demonstrate Doppler’s effect using sound transmitter (e.g. rotating single-frequency
    sound emitter)
   perform experiment to examine objects’ motions obey laws of classical physics in an
    inertial frame that moving in constant velocity
   perform Michelson Morley experiment to examine speed of light is constant and
    independent of the motion of light source or observer
   study the fast-travel muon from cosmos can be detected on the Earth surface before
    decay as evidence supporting special relativity
   use cloud chamber to observe cosmic rays from the Universe
   use optical device and tuned sound beats to observe something traveling to be length
    contracted and time dilated respectively to simulate the world observed under special
    relativity
   study Schwarzschild radius and the recent discoveries about black hole
   study the discovery of gravitational wave from the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
    Wave Observatory (LIGO) in 2016 that supported the prediction by Albert Einstein 100
    years ago
   visit to the sites with astronomical instruments, such as Astropark and Ho Koon Nature
    Education cum Astronomical Centre
   observe astronomical phenomena with the naked eyes
    −     compare the colour and brightness of different stars
    −     recognise the Western and Chinese constellations and the apparent motion of
          celestial bodies in the sky
    −     meteor showers
    −     special astronomical events, such as lunar eclipse
   use optical telescopes to observe
    −    the surface (impact craters, lunar Maria, rays, etc) of the Moon with telescope,
         estimate height and dimension of lunar features, etc.
    −    planetary events like conjunction, elongation, opposition, etc.
    −    sunspots and solar eclipses with proper safety measures taken
    −    the features of major planets with a small telescope, such as the Great Red Spot,
         belts and satellites of Jupiter, the phases of Venus, and the ring of Saturn
                                             71
    −    special astronomical events such as the opposition of Mars
    −    bright comets
    −    binary stars, nebula and deep sky objects
    −    regular / long-term observation projects for tracing the changes: lunar phase,
         Jupiter’s moon motion, Great Red Spot, phases of Venus
   observe artificial satellites and receive radio signals from space stations using antenna
   appreciate the development of scientific research of our country by studying the
    information from national large research facilities in astronomy and cosmology, such as
    Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical Telescope (FAST) and Large High-Altitude Air-
    Shower Observatory (LHAASO), National Astronomical Observatories of China



Suggested Computational Physics activities
   simulate doppler effect
   simulate different frames of reference for simultaneity and time dilation



STSE connections and socio-scientific issues
   study the astrophysics discoveries which have stimulated the development of modern
    science and eventually changed our ways of living
   study the impact of cosmic rays or celestial bodies from outer space and our reactions to
    them, such as meteor and solar wind
   compare the calendar dates among different cultures and relate them with astronomical
    observations




                                             72
9.         Scientific Inquiry in Physics
Overview
A portion of lesson time is assigned for developing students’ scientific inquiry skills through
practical tasks and scientific investigations/engineering design activities to investigate physical
phenomena or solve problems. Computational Physics should be implemented in connections
with these tasks for equipping students’ ability in applying cross-disciplinary skills. Students
are expected to value the importance of using digital tools and AI critically and responsibly,
recognising both their benefits and limitations in scientific inquiry; and appreciate the need to
integrate digital technologies and AI with sound scientific reasoning when solving
physics‑related problems.

Teachers should arrange at least 8 practical tasks. Students’ hands-on experience in
performing these tasks are required. Teachers can select the experiments from the key
practical tasks, and offer some school-based experiments to meet students learning needs.

Teachers should arrange at least one scientific investigation/engineering design activity for
engaging students in an inquiry-based learning among the practical tasks. Through inquiry-
based learning, students are expected to develop the scientific inquiry skills stated in chapter
2.2.1, and to be able to

    develop an investigation plan and justify its appropriateness
    put forward suggestions for ways of improving the validity and reliability of a scientific
     investigation/effectiveness and efficiency of a product
    use accurate terminologies and appropriate reporting styles to communicate findings and
     conclusions of an investigation
    use appropriate digital tools (e.g. data-loggers and sensors, spreadsheets, graphing
     software and AI), to collect, process and interpret data, search for and organise physics
     information, and evaluate the reliability and scientific accuracy of digital and AI-
     generated outputs
    evaluate the validity of conclusions with reference to the process of investigation and the
     data and information gathered.




                                                73
Time Allocation


                   Practical tasks                  Scientific Investigation/ Engineering
                                                    Design

 Learning          Scientific Inquiry
 Targets               Laboratory Technique
                       Data Analysis
                       Order of Accuracy and Error Treatment
                       Awareness of Safety

                   Computational Physics
                     Building Computational Models
                     Computer-Assisted Data Analysis

 Process            Prepare the experiment          Develop and         Define problem and
                    Use apparatus/                   justify              design solutions
                     computational tools to           investigation plan  Develop prototypes
                     conduct experiment              Implement            and conduct
                    Complete                         investigation plan   scientific tests
                     assignments/reports             Analyse             Analyse data to
                                                      preliminary data     determine optimal
                                                      and refine the       setting of the
                                                      plan                 prototype
                                                     Report results and  Improve the
                                                      error analysis       prototype based on
                                                                           the analysed data

 Estimated                 ~ 80 minutes                            ~ 240 minutes
 lesson time for
 each activity     At least eight (8) hands-on practical tasks performed by students, including
                   at least one (1) Scientific Investigation/ Engineering Design activity

                                                      16 hours




                                            74
Implementation
Scientific investigations and/or engineering design aim to solve physics-related problems. It
consists of inquiry-oriented activities that provide students with direct exposure to experience
scientists’/engineers’ work as community that reinforce the nature of science. In this
connection, students can actively engage in their learning, formulating questions, investigating
widely and then building new ideas and solving problems.


The nature of learning and teaching activity could be distinguished into Scientific Investigation
and Engineering Design. An authentic task may not be solely either one but an integration of
them. The following provides the general principle in designing the learning and teaching task
for teachers’ reference.


   Scientific Investigation – focus on formulating science questions and constructing
   explanations. Students learn conducting scientific investigation and develop relevant
   inquiry skills in primary and junior secondary levels. The process generally involves
   defining a problem, plan and investigate, gather data, organise and analyse their results,
   and communicate their findings. Through the process students could apply relevant
   physics concepts and science inquiry skills, so to enhance their understanding of the nature
   of science.


   Teachers can arrange the key practical tasks stated in session 2.3 or school-based
   experiments for scientific investigation by conducting them in inquiry-based oriented
   approach. Teachers are also encouraged to arrange some authentic or open-ended tasks.
   Some possible topics are suggested below:


      Investigating the factors affecting rate of cooling
      Justifying a motion to be uniform motion or uniformly accelerating motion
      Estimating the terminal velocity of an object
      Investigating the relationship of parameters in projectile motion
      Investigating the factors affecting the efficiency of a solar cell
      Estimating the distance of a celestial object from the Earth
      Analysing the radio signals from celestial bodies
      Programing a simulation of simple harmonic motion and study the damping factor
      Programing a complex system to illustrate social processes, such as forest fire, spread

                                               75
    of disease and crowd control


Engineering Design – focus on defining problems and designing solutions. Building on
the “Engineering design and innovation” in Science (P1-6) and “Engineering Design” in
Science (S1-3), students acquire the general principles in constructing and improving
models.      The process generally involves defining problem, designing solution,
constructing product, carrying out testing and evaluating for improvement. Through the
engineering design cycle, they could experience how products produced by making use of
physics principle, technology and computational thinking skills so as to facilitate their
learning in the innovation and technology.


Some possible topics for engineering design are suggested below:
   Designing and making a simple pendulum clock for presenting a specific period
   Constructing and improving the performance of a solar cooker
   Constructing and improving the performance a water rocket to meet a target in terms
    of height, accuracy or installation of parachute
   Designing and making an antenna to receive radio signal
   Making use of various kinds of sensors to construct a robotic system
   Constructing and testing a home-made wind turbine to generate electricity
   Constructing a renewable energy powered system for particular purpose, such as
    lighting and cooling
   Constructing a parking alarm system by programming sonic sensor with micro-
    computing device
   Constructing smart devices by programming and applying physics concepts for smart
    home or school campus, for example, using infrared sensor in automatic system




                                          76
Chapter 3             Assessment Framework

3.1 Assessment Objectives
The assessment objectives of Physics are to evaluate the abilities of candidates to:

1.      recall and show understanding of the facts, concepts, models and principles of physics,
        and the relationships between different topic areas in the curriculum framework;
2.      apply knowledge, concepts and principles of physics to explain phenomena and
        observations, and to solve problems;
3.      show an understanding of the use of apparatus in performing experiments;
4.      demonstrate an understanding of the method used in the study of physics;
5.      present data in various forms, such as tables, graphs, charts, diagrams, and transpose
        them from one form into another;
6.      analyse and interpret data, and draw appropriate conclusions;
7.      show an understanding of the treatment of errors;
8.      select, organize, and communicate information clearly, precisely and logically;
9.      demonstrate understanding of the applications of physics to daily life and its
        contributions to the modern world;
10.     show awareness of the ethical, moral, social, economic and technological implications of
        physics, and critically evaluate physics-related issues; and
11.     make suggestions, choices and judgments based on the examination of evidence using
        knowledge and principles of physics.


3.2 Assessment Design
3.2.1       Mode of assessment

The public assessment of Physics consists of a public examination component and a school-
based assessment component as outlined in the following table:

 Component                                                                Weighting    Duration

                                                                                        2 hours
                     Paper 1       Conventional Questions                     52%
 Public                                                                                15 minutes
 Examination
                     Paper 2       Multiple-choice Questions                  28%        1 hour

 School-based Assessment (SBA)                                                20%         ⎯⎯


                                                   77
3.2.2        Public examination

Paper 1 consists of conventional questions, including short questions, structured questions, and
essay questions, set on both the Core and Extension components of the curriculum. It carries
52% of the subject mark. Candidates are required to answer all questions in Paper 1.


Paper 2 consists of multiple-choice questions set on both the Core and Extension components
of the curriculum. It carries 28% of the subject mark. Candidates are required to answer all
questions in Paper 2.


Questions set on the Extension component would not exceed 30% of the written paper marks.



3.2.3        School-based assessment (SBA)

School-based assessment (SBA) is compulsory for all school candidates. Candidates will be
assessed by their teachers on their performance of a wide range of skills involved in practical
work throughout S5 and S6. Candidates are required to perform a stipulated amount of
practical work. The work should be integrated closely with the curriculum and form a part of
the normal learning and teaching process. Candidates may also be required to design and
conduct a scientific investigation with a view to solving an authentic problem. They are
expected to make use of their knowledge and understanding of physics in performing such a
scientific investigation, through which their generic skills, practical skills, process skills and
reporting skills, etc. would be developed and assessed.

The table below summarises the minimum number of assessments required in S5 and S6 for
the SBA, and the respective weighting in the subject:


                                        Minimum number of assessments
        S5                                          1 EXPT (6%)

        S6                    1 EXPT (6%)                               1 SI (8%)


Over the two years of S5 and S6, there should be at least two assessments for experiments
(EXPT) and one assessment for scientific investigation (SI).


For monitoring and authentication purposes, candidates are required to keep good custody of
all their work in SBA until the publication of the HKDSE examination results.
                                               78
Private candidates need not complete the SBA component. Their subject result will be based
entirely on their public examination results.


The detailed requirements, regulations, assessment criteria, guidelines and methods of
assessment are provided in the SBA Teachers’ Handbook for HKDSE Physics published by
the Hong Kong Examinations and Assessment Authority.




                                            79
[A sub-section to be included in Chapter 4: Learning and Teaching of the Physics (S4-6) Curriculum and
Assessment Guide]                                                                                   Annex 1

The Use of Digital Educational Tools and Artificial Intelligence for Learning, Teaching
and Assessment of Physics



The 2024 Nobel Prize in Physics recognised how physics inspired the development of artificial
intelligence (AI) tools used today. Integrating AI tools into physics lessons allows students
to directly experience how scientific principles lead to technological innovation. This
approach helps students understand the nature of science as a creative, evolving process that
turns theoretical models into real-world applications.

Digital educational tools and AI provide support for learning and teaching and promote
pedagogical innovation in Physics. Through the appropriate use of digital tools and AI-
assisted strategies, teachers can design interactive learning activities, better understand students’
learning progress and needs, and enhance teaching effectiveness through diversified
pedagogical approaches.

With appropriate utilization of digital educational tools and AI-assisted teaching strategies,
teachers can better design interactive learning and teaching materials, enabling experiments
with efficient and effective data collection and analysis through computing devices, as well as
simulating abstract physical phenomena for helping students to overcome the cognitive barriers
on counterintuitive concepts.

Teachers may make appropriate use of AI and digital educational tools, including simulations,
animations, visualisation and data analysis tools, to help students develop a deeper
understanding of abstract physics concepts. Online learning platforms and AI-assisted tools
may also be used to provide students with diversified learning experiences and timely feedback,
thereby promoting self-directed learning and enhancing learning effectiveness.

The following table shows some examples of the applications of digital educational tools for
teachers’ reference:
   Digital Educational Tools                                   Pedagogical Use

 Mobile Devices                      •   Use built-in sensors (e.g. accelerometer, light sensor,
                                         microphone) of mobile device to carry out experiments or
                                         scientific investigations to study physical phenomena
                                         quantitatively. Bridging theory and everyday phenomena
                                         and enhances evidence-based reasoning.
                                     •   Enable students to take videos of real-world motions (e.g.
                                         projectile, standing wave) and then analyse the motions
                                         qualitatively.

 Data-loggers and Sensors            •   Facilitate real-time data collection and graphical analysis in
                                         practical activities; promote scientific inquiry skills by
                                         allowing students to design experiments, observe patterns


                                                      80
                                                                                             Annex 1



                                     instantly, and focus on data interpretation rather than manual
                                     plotting.

 Programming Software /          •   Enable students to practise data analysis, graphing, numerical
 Spreadsheet                         simulations, and modelling of physical phenomena (e.g.
                                     motion, circuits, waves).
                                 •   Promote computational thinking and allow interactive
                                     exploration of different possible scenarios, improve
                                     understanding of concepts through visualization, and develop
                                     scientific inquiry skills using computer.

 Computer Simulations            •   Enable students to visualise and manipulate abstract physical
                                     phenomena (e.g. electric fields, projectile motion, wave
                                     interference) in a risk-free virtual environment, helping them
                                     overcome intuitive misconceptions and develop conceptual
                                     understanding through inquiry-based exploration.

 Online Real-time Experiment     •   Offer remote but real experiments enabling students to safely
 Platform                            and repeatably practise experimental techniques and deepen
                                     understanding of underlying physics principles.
 Multimedia Resources            •   Animations and videos help students visualise abstract
                                     concepts.
 (Animations and videos)         •   Stimulate interest, support conceptual understanding, and
                                     allow repeated observation of experimental techniques and
                                     phenomena.

 Artificial Intelligence (AI)    •   Use AI, with the aid of vibe coding, to generate starter code
                                     for Physics simulations, allowing safe, repeatable
                                     investigation of difficult experiments (e.g. alpha-particle
                                     scattering, escape velocity).
                                 •   AI guides students through experimental design and data
                                     interpretation, deepening understanding of the nature of
                                     scientific experimentation; students may also modify the code
                                     to test hypotheses, developing computational thinking
                                     alongside Physics modelling skills.
                                 •   Assist teachers in designing curriculum-aligned learning,
                                     teaching and assessment materials tailored to students’ needs,
                                     thereby creating curriculum space for laboratory work,
                                     discussion and deeper conceptual understanding.



The table below helps teachers identify and select appropriate digital educational tools
according to specific purposes of learning activities in Physics, illustrating how different tools
can be used flexibly and complementarily to support lesson design, learning activities and

                                                81
                                                                                         Annex 1



assessment.


 Functions of       Mobile        Programming Computer       Online Real-   Multimedia AI
 Digital            Devices/      software /    Simulations time            Resources
 Educational        Data-logger   spreadsheet                Experiment
 Tools              and sensors                              Platform

 Build                                 ✓                                                   ✓
 Computational
 Models

 Practical work         ✓              ✓                           ✓
 and data
 handling

 Simulations for                                     ✓                                     ✓
 concepts
 illustration

 Visualisation of                                                                ✓
 abstract
 concepts

 Assessment for                                                                            ✓
 learning and
 self-directed
 learning




Pedagogical Considerations of Using AI in Physics
When applying AI (including GenAI) to support learning and teaching, teachers should strike
an appropriate balance between AI-assisted learning, hands-on scientific investigations and
other teacher-guided learning activities. Teachers are required to exercise professional
judgement in determining the appropriate use of AI and to ensure that they continue to play the
role of learning facilitators. Students should be provided with sufficient opportunities to
engage in authentic learning experiences, including practical laboratory work, scientific
investigations, reflective discussions on socio-scientific issues and scientific reasoning, so as
to develop conceptual understanding and scientific inquiry skills.

                                                82
                                                                                    Annex 1



For learning and teaching materials designed with the assistance of GenAI, teachers should
clearly indicate the AI-generated components and avoid practices that may compromise
academic integrity. Teachers should verify the authenticity, accuracy and consistency of AI-
generated content before use. Where AI tools are used to support assessment or feedback,
teachers should conduct manual review and moderation to ensure assessment quality and
uphold academic integrity.

Teachers should also foster students’ awareness of the ethical and responsible use of AI,
including an understanding of its limitations and potential inaccuracies. Students should be
guided to evaluate AI-generated outputs critically, verify information using authoritative
sources, and use AI as an assistive tool rather than a substitute for scientific reasoning.


The Use of AI in Physics Lesson Setting


When planning Physics lessons, teachers should clearly define the learning objectives and
consider how AI can be used to support students’ engagement in scientific practices aligned
with those objectives, such as applying physics concepts to novel problems, analysing and
interpreting experimental data, and constructing explanations and evaluations.


When planning Physics lessons involving the use of AI, teachers should consider:
•   the intended learning objectives and expected learning outcomes;
•   how AI can support, rather than replace, students’ conceptual understanding and inquiry;
•   the provision of appropriate scaffolding and guidance for students’ use of AI tools;
•   learning strategies to consolidate understanding and promote knowledge transfer; and
•   the balance between digital learning experiences and other teacher-guided learning
    activities, including practical laboratory work, scientific investigations, reflective
    discussion on socio-scientific issues and scientific reasoning.




                                             83
                                                                                                   Annex 1



               Example of Using Digital Educational Tools and AI in Classroom Design

AI tools can assist in visualising the abstract microscopic world of Physics. With well-designed learning
and teaching activities, teachers can create opportunities for students to link macroscopic properties with the
interactions between molecules at the sub-microscopic level through active, interactive and constructive
learning. When designing AI-assisted activities, teachers should focus on helping students apply relevant
prior knowledge and transfer their acquired understanding to novel problems, while critically evaluating AI-
generated content.

Topic: Thermal Physics: Kinetic Theory

Learning outcomes:

•   realise the random motion of molecules in a gas
•   realise gas pressure resulted from molecular bombardment on container wall
•   relate macroscopic quantity temperature with microscopic quantity average kinetic energy
•   interpret the change of temperature from the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
                             Learning activities                               The Use of Digital
                                                                             Educational Tools / AI

1. Teachers first teach the fundamental knowledge of kinetic theory (e.g. No AI
   gas molecules are performing ever random motions, and pressure
   arises from collisions of gas molecules with the container walls).
   Teachers then ask students to predict and sketch how gas molecules
   move and collide inside a sealed container based on their
   understanding of kinetic theory, and to select the parameters of gas
   molecules that being investigated (e.g. velocity, quantity, kinetic
   energy).
2. Teachers guide students to use vibe coding with the aid of generative- Using GenAI to create
   AI tools to create an interactive simulation to visualise the parameters simulation
   of gas molecules (e.g. velocity, kinetic energy).
3. Students are guided to observe and test the generated simulation. No AI
   Students may discuss with peers and use their knowledge of kinetic
   theory to evaluate whether it can simulate realistic physical
   phenomena and modify the simulation.
4. Students evaluate the molecular motions depicted in the AI-generated Using GenAI to modify the
   simulation using the appropriate physical laws and principles, and thus simulation
   identifying and explaining any mistakes made in the simulation.
   After peer discussion, students can revise their generated simulations,
   and compare the original misconceptions with the corrected version.




                                                      84
 [A sub-section to be included in Chapter 3: Curriculum Planning of the Physics (S4-6) Curriculum and
                                                                                                        Annex 2
 Assessment Guide]

Connections across Senior Secondary Science Subjects

In the course of the learning and teaching of Biology (S4-6), Chemistry (S4-6) and Physics (S4-6)
curricula, students will encounter scientific inquiry skills, subject contents and mathematical skills
that are interconnected across science subjects. These shared learning elements are important
components that constitute the nurturing of students’ scientific literacy. Specifically, although
these science curricula are offered as distinct elective subjects at the senior secondary level, they
are underpinned by shared scientific principles and modes of inquiry in science. Students taking
two or three science electives therefore experience reinforcement in science learning, as concepts
and skills developed in one subject often deepen and extend student’s understanding in another.


To enhance the coherence and depth of learning across Biology, Chemistry and Physics , this section
highlights explicitly the common scientific inquiry skills, interrelated subject contents and
mathematical skills articulated in the respective curricula. By recognising these shared elements,
teachers can adopt a more integrated approach to science teaching, not only reinforcing the shared
scientific skills, but also developing students’ understanding of science when students are engaged
in the process and practice of science. In particular, Physics teachers should not focus solely on
subject-specific knowledge within the physics discipline, but should also consciously cultivate the
shared scientific competences common to all science subjects. This shared emphasis supports
progression from Science (S1-3) curriculum, strengthens coherence within the Science Education
KLA, and equips students with the competencies required for evidence-based inquiry, critical
evaluation of data, and informed decision-making in scientific and real-life contexts.


Common scientific inquiry skills across Biology (S4-6), Chemistry (S4-6) and Physics (S4-6)
curricula


Experimenting, data processing and scientific reasoning skills are fundamental to Biology,
Chemistry and Physics at the senior secondary level. Together, they form the foundation of
scientific inquiry as emphasised in the Science Education Key Learning Area. These skills are
progressively developed through Science (S1-3) curriculum and enable students to generate reliable
empirical evidence, analyse data quantitatively and qualitatively, evaluate experimental limitations,
and draw valid and evidence-based conclusions.


Through the practical tasks recommended in the respective Curriculum and Assessment Guides for
the senior secondary science curricula, students experience the evidence-driven and systematic
nature of scientific investigation. The shared emphasis on scientific inquiry not only strengthens
the learning of valued competences among the three science disciplines but also reinforces
transferable skills such as critical thinking, problem-solving, and collaboration, while cultivating
                                                        85
                                                                                               Annex 2



positive values and attitudes including integrity in data handling, commitment to safety and
awareness of ethical considerations in scientific practice.


1.   Experimenting skills

By conducting the key practical tasks set out in the respective Curriculum and Assessment Guides,
ranging from structured practical work and inquiry to more open-ended investigative studies,
students actively engage in the essential processes of scientific inquiry in a systematic and reflective
manner, including observation, hypothesis formulation, experimental design, data collection, data
interpretation, and conclusion drawing. Engaging in practical activities across Biology, Chemistry,
and Physics enables students to both deepen subject-specific understanding and appreciate the
common principles underlying scientific practice across disciplines, such as the tentative yet
evidence-based nature of scientific knowledge, the importance of validity and reliability, and the
role of creativity and perseverance in advancing understanding.


The following experimenting skills are commonly articulated across the three subjects, with clear
progression from the junior secondary level:


E1 Planning and designing investigations
E2 Risk assessment and safe laboratory practices
E3   Selecting and handling apparatus and materials
E4   Controlling variables and ensuring reliability
E5   Accurate and precise measurement and observation
E6   Data collection and recording
E7   Evaluation and improvement of experiments




                                                  86
                                                                                                    Annex 2



E1 Planning and designing investigations

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Formulate testable hypotheses or research      ✓    Formulating a hypothesis based on
     questions based on observations or relevant         observed phenomena
     prior scientific knowledge                     ✓    Identifying independent variables,
 •   Identify questions to study and make                dependent variables and control variables
     predictions                                    ✓    Choosing from alternative experimental
 •   Select appropriate methods and justify              methods or improving the method for a
     experimental approaches                             scientific investigation
 •   Identify independent, dependent, and
     control variables
 •   Design logical and feasible procedures to
     address the research question
 •   Plan and write experimental procedures



E2 Risk assessment and safe laboratory practices

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Carry out risk assessments for experiments /   ✓    Using apparatus appropriately and safely
     scientific investigations
 •   Implement appropriate safety measures (e.g.
     use of personal protective equipment,
     proper handling of chemicals, high-voltage
     electrical equipment, or biological
     specimens)
 •   Demonstrate responsible laboratory
     practice, including proper waste disposal,
     adherence to safety rules (e.g. always
     attending a heat source), and appropriate
     emergency procedures
 •   Conduct investigations safely to collect
     valid and reliable data



                                                    87
                                                                                                    Annex 2



E3 Selecting and handling apparatus and materials

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Select apparatus and materials appropriate     ✓    Using apparatus appropriately and safety
     to the required precision, scale, and nature
     of the investigation
 •   Use instruments and materials properly and
     competently
 •   Handle materials efficiently to minimise
     waste and ensure experimental feasibility



E4 Controlling variables and ensuring reliability

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Design controlled experiments to               ✓    Setting up a controlled experiment to
     investigate relationships (correlational or         identify causal relationships
     causal) between variables                      ✓    Identifying independent variables,
 •   Identify potential confounding factors and          dependent variables and control variables
     minimise their effect
 •   Use repeated trials and averaging
     measurements to reduce the effect of
     random errors
 •   Assess reliability and suggest improvements
     to enhance experimental design




                                                    88
                                                                                                 Annex 2



E5 Accurate and precise measurement and observation

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or           Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Use measuring instruments correctly and       ✓    Making qualitative observations and
     read scales to appropriate precision               recording quantitative measurements
 •   Distinguish between accuracy and precision    ✓    Commenting accuracy and precision in a
 •   Make careful qualitative observations (e.g.        scientific measurement
     colour change, precipitate formation,
     behavioural response, unexpected
     phenomena)
 •   Comment on accuracy and precision in
     scientific measurements



E6 Data collection and recording

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or           Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Collect sufficient and relevant data to       ✓    Making qualitative observations and
     address the research question                      recording quantitative measurements
 •   Record measurements with appropriate          ✓    Using tables and graphs for organising and
     units and significant figures                      presenting data
 •   Record raw data systematically in tables or
     structured formats
 •   Perform initial data processing where
     appropriate (e.g. averaging or unit
     conversions)
 •   Present data clearly to facilitate further
     analysis




                                                   89
                                                                                                  Annex 2



E7 Evaluation and improvement of experiments

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Evaluate the feasibility, validity and         ✓    Choosing from alternative experimental
     reliability of experiments                          methods or improving the method for a
 •   Suggest ways to improve the feasibility,            scientific investigation
     validity, and/or reliability of experiments
 •   Identify limitations and sources of error in
     experiments
 •   Propose refinements or alternative
     approaches for future studies




2.   Data processing skills

After collecting data from experiments, students are required to process and analyse the data in
order to draw valid conclusions to support or refute the set hypothesis. The fundamental
knowledge and skills are developed in the Science (S1-3) curriculum. At the senior secondary
level, these skills are further strengthened and applied with greater mathematical rigour and
conceptual depth across Biology, Chemistry and Physics.


The following data processing skills are commonly articulated across the three science subjects,
with clear progression from the junior secondary level:


D1 Use of SI unit, prefixes and derivation of units
D2 Significant figures and treatment of measurement errors
D3 Graphical presentation of relationships and functions
D4 Data analysis and interpretation




                                                    90
                                                                                                   Annex 2



D1 Use of SI unit, prefixes and derivation of units
 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or             Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Use SI units appropriately when expressing      ✓    Using scientific notation, significant
     physical, chemical and biological quantities         figures and ratio for expressing and
 •   Perform unit conversions accurately,                 comparing scientific data
     including the use of prefixes and scientific
     notation
 •   Derive and interpret compound units from
     base SI units where appropriate
 •   Represent quantities with appropriate order
     of magnitude


D2 Significant figures and treatment of measurement errors
 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or             Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 Physics should be able to

 •   Record measurements with appropriate            ✓    Using scientific notation, significant
     precision according to the measuring                 figures and ratio for expressing and
     instrument used                                      comparing scientific data
 •   Express calculated results using an
     appropriate number of significant figures
 •   Distinguish between accuracy and precision
 •   Reduce the effect of random errors through
     repeated measurements and averaging
 •   Identify anomalous results and evaluate their
     impact on reliability




                                                     91
                                                                                                          Annex 2



D3 Graphical presentation of relationships and functions
 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or Physics            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 should be able to

 •   Select appropriate variables for the x- and y-         ✓    Using tables and graphs for data analysis
     axes based on the nature of the independent
     and dependent variables
 •   Choose suitable scales and units, axis labels,
     and graph titles for clear and accurate
     graphical representation
 •   Plot data accurately (by hand and/or using
     digital tools) to construct appropriate line
     graphs or scatter graphs, or other suitable
     graph types
 •   Recognise and represent common
     mathematical relationships graphically


D4 Data analysis and interpretation
 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or Physics            Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 should be able to

 •   Perform data analyses to identify patterns,            ✓     Using tables and graphs for data analysis
     trends or relationships in the collected data          ✓     Identifying outliers and handling data from
 •   Draw appropriate best-fit lines or curves from               repeated measurements to assess the
     graphical data, and use them to interpret trends,            uncertainty incurred
     interpolate/extrapolate values or determine
     slopes/intercepts
 •   Interpret graphical representations to identify
     patterns, relationships, anomalies, or limitations
     in the data
 •   Relate graphical and numerical results to
     underlying scientific principles
 •   Evaluate limitations of data and suggest
     improvements




                                                       92
                                                                                                           Annex 2



3.   Scientific Reasoning skills

Scientific reasoning skills involve deductive, inductive and abductive reasoning as foundational
processes, these are applied in the use, evaluation, and revision of scientific models and
argumentations. Through such reasoning, students interpret empirical evidence, construct
coherent scientific explanations, and critically evaluate claims and models. Progressively
developed from the Science (S1-3) curriculum, these higher-order cognitive skills are central to
scientific literacy as articulated in the Science Education Key Learning Area. In senior secondary
Biology, Chemistry, and Physics, students apply scientific reasoning when analysing experimental
data, evaluating the validity of conclusions, applying concepts to novel situations, and examining
Science, Technology, Society and the Environment-related issues using evidence-based judgement.


The following scientific reasoning skills are commonly articulated across the three subjects, with
clear progression from the junior secondary level:


R1 Scientific reasoning: deduction, induction and abduction
R2 Application of reasoning: scientific modelling and argumentation


R1 Scientific reasoning: deduction, induction and abduction

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or Physics             Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 should be able to

 •   Draw logical inferences from observations,              ✓    Using specific data to induce a general trend,
     experimental data or scientific information                  conclusion or model
 •   Examine evidence and apply logical reasoning            ✓    Using a set of general observations, trend or
     to draw valid conclusions                                    model to deduce a specific result
 •   Make informed judgements when outcomes                  ✓    Making inference to the best possible
     involve uncertainty or probability                           explanation to the observed phenomenon
 •   Use inductive reasoning to generalise from              ✓    Making informed decision based on the
     specific observations or data to broader trends,             probability of phenomenon to be occurred
     patterns, conclusions or models
 •   Apply deductive reasoning to predict specific
     outcomes from a set of general observations or
     data and established laws, principles, theories,
     models, or established trends
 •   Apply abductive reasoning to infer the most
     plausible explanation consistent with available
     evidence when multiple interpretations are

                                                        93
                                                                                                          Annex 2



     possible
 •   Recognise the appropriate contexts, strengths,
     and limitations of inductive, deductive and
     abductive reasoning in scientific inquiry


R2 Application of reasoning: scientific modelling and argumentation

 Students studying Biology, Chemistry or Physics             Articulation with Science (S1-3) curriculum
 should be able to

 •   Apply appropriate scientific models to explain          ✓    Using specific data to induce a general trend,
     phenomena, interpret data, and predict                       conclusion or model
     outcomes in familiar and novel contexts                 ✓    Using a set of general observations, trend or
 •   Evaluate the strengths, limitations,                         model to deduce a specific result
     assumptions, and tentative nature of scientific         ✓    Making inference to the best possible
     models                                                       explanation to the observed phenomenon
 •   Construct and present reasoned scientific               ✓    Making informed decision based on the
     arguments supported by empirical evidence,                   probability of phenomenon to be occurred
     logical reasoning, and relevant scientific
     principles
 •   Engage in scientific argumentation as a
     systematic process to analyse, explain, critique,
     or defend explanations of natural phenomena
 •   Integrate new concepts or evidence into
     existing knowledge frameworks and apply them
     critically to new situations
 •   Appreciate the evolutionary nature of scientific
     knowledge, where models and explanations are
     subject to revision based on accumulating
     evidence




                                                        94
                                                                                              Annex 2



Related subject contents across Biology (S4-6), Chemistry (S4-6) and Physics (S4-6)
curricula


Biology, Chemistry, and Physics are offered as distinct elective subjects at the senior secondary
level. Nevertheless, they share many fundamental concepts and principles. Students who
concurrently study two or three science subjects gain significant advantages in developing a more
comprehensive and interconnected understanding of the unified nature of science. By exploring
the common fundamental concepts, such as matter, energy and interactions governing the physical
world from subatomic to universe scales, through different disciplinary perspectives, students
reinforce and deepen their mastery across subjects, enabling them to apply knowledge flexibly in
novel or real-life contexts. For example, understanding conservation of energy in Physics
strengthens interpretation of enthalpy changes in Chemistry and energy flow in biological
ecosystems, fostering more sophisticated and transferable conceptual understanding.


Furthermore, studying multiple science subjects promotes fluency in shared language and
conventions. Students become more proficient in precise scientific terminology (e.g. mole,
potential difference, activation energy), symbolic representations (e.g. equations, graphs, structural
formulae), and quantitative tools (e.g. significant figures, unit conversions, error estimation). This
shared use of scientific language, notation, and representational practices reduces barriers between
subjects, enhances communication of science ideas, and strengthens students’ overall scientific
literacy.


Making these cross-disciplinary connections explicit enables students to develop a more integrated
and coherent understanding of scientific phenomena. More specifically, students taking two or
three science electives will recognise that concepts encountered in one science subject often provide
explanatory frameworks for understanding phenomena in another, thereby deepening conceptual
understanding and promoting the application of knowledge across contexts.




                                                 95
                                                                                               Annex 2



The following table provides examples of related contents of Biology, Chemistry and Physics
curricula, illustrating how core ideas, such as energy transformations, the structure of matter,
particle interactions, radiation, and the relationship between structure and function, are developed
and applied in different disciplinary contexts.


Examples of related subject contents of Biology, Chemistry and Physics:
 Physics                           Chemistry                       Biology

 Temperature, heat and internal    Enthalpy changes in chemical    Energy flow in ecosystems;
 energy; Change of state; Law of   reaction                        energy transformations in
 conservation of energy in a                                       cellular respiration and
 closed system                                                     photosynthesis; Regulation of
                                                                   body temperature
 Gas laws                          Mole concept; Avogadro’s Law;   Gas exchange in humans and
                                   Molar volume                    plants
 Kinetic theory                    Rate of reaction                Factors affecting rate of
                                                                   enzymatic reactions; Diffusion
                                                                   and osmosis across cell
                                                                   membranes

 EM spectrum; Intensity            IR spectroscopy; Colorimetry    Effects of light intensity on
                                                                   photosynthesis; Light absorption
                                                                   in photosynthetic pigments

 Electric circuit                  Chemical cells; Electrolysis    Nerve impulse transmission

 Electrostatics; Scalars and       Bond polarity; Intermolecular   Enzyme-substrate binding; water
 vectors                           forces                          properties

 Atomic model; Radioactive         Atomic structure; Subatomic     Structure and chemical bonding
 decay; Isotopes                   particles; Isotopes             in biomolecules (e.g. DNA
                                                                   nucleotides, proteins)

 Energy sources                    Fossil fuels and carbon         Use of resources in ecosystems
                                   compounds




                                                   96
                                                                                                    Annex 2



Mathematical skills across Biology (S4-6), Chemistry (S4-6) and Physics (S4-6) curricula


A strong foundation in mathematics is essential for the study of Biology, Chemistry, and Physics at
senior secondary level, as many mathematical skills are shared or closely related across the three
disciplines. These include algebraic manipulation and formula application, data handling and
graphical analysis, as well as application of geometry and trigonometry. Examples of related
mathematical skills of Biology, Chemistry and Physics are tabulated below for reference:

 Mathematical skills     Contexts in Science Subjects (Examples)
 Manipulation of         Biology
 equations and           •   Apply equations related to microscopy (e.g. magnification = image size /
 functions                  actual size).
                         Chemistry
                         •   Solve algebraic equations (e.g. rate = k[reactant1]x[reactant2]y)
                         •   Perform calculations involving logarithms (e.g. pH = -log[H+], Arrhenius
                            equation)
                         Physics
                         • Derive and apply equations to solve problems for topics such as mechanics,
                             electricity and magnetism, and quantum physics
 Handling data and       Biology
 use of units            • Convert between metric units (e.g. millimeters to micrometers) when
                             calculating the sizes of sub-cellular structures
                         • Apply appropriate measurement units when quantifying environmental
                             conditions
                         Chemistry
                         •   Express physical quantities (e.g. molecular mass, concentration) using
                             appropriate units and how they can be inter-converted
                         •   Calculate a mean titre

                         Physics
                         •   Perform dimensional analysis by converting and matching SI units
                         •   Apply the concept of order of magnitude and significant figures in
                             experimental measurements
 Use and                 Biology
 interconversions of     •   Calculate percentages to determine the efficiency of energy transfer
 ratios, fractions and       between trophic levels
 percentages
                         Chemistry

                                                      97
                                                                                                   Annex 2



                       •   Determine empirical formulae and molecular formulae from compositions
                          by mass and molar masses
                       Physics
                       •   Find the efficiency of transformer, electrical appliance and machines

 Constructing and      Biology
 interpreting graphs   • Plot graphs to determine physical properties of biological tissues
                       • Interpret curves to deduce physiological changes over time or distance
                       Chemistry
                       •   Determine the activation energy of a chemical reaction
                       • Calculate enthalpy changes from experimental results
                       Physics
                       •   Plot and analyse graphs for physical laws
                       •   Interpret the physical meaning of slope, intercepts and area under graph

 Application of        Biology
 geometry and          •   Understand three-dimensional structures of biomolecules
 trigonometry
                       Chemistry
                       •   Predict and draw three-dimensional diagrams to represent molecular
                           shapes

                       Physics
                       •   Apply addition of vector to find resultant vector and resolve a vector into
                           components (e.g. acceleration, force)
                       •   Apply dot product and cross product in mechanics (e.g. work done) and
                           electricity and magnetism (e.g. magnetic force)



Students who study two or three science subjects benefit significantly as they can reinforce these
common mathematical skills, leading to deeper conceptual understanding and greater fluency in
applying mathematics to solve scientific problems. This advantage is further amplified when
students also take Mathematics Extended Part (Module 1 or 2) alongside the science subjects, as
the study of extended mathematics enables them to engage with more advanced science topics at a
deeper level. For example, knowledge of calculus from Module 1 or 2 equips students with a
stronger grasp of concepts such as rate of change and the relationship between the area under a
curve and physical quantities in the kinematics topic in Physics. Such synergy not only supports
but also extends learning across all three subjects.



                                                  98
                                                                                                                                                   Annex 3

                                        Summary of proposed updates in contents of the Physics curriculum
Direction of Update        Suggested Revision on the Curriculum Content                                           Rationale

Revisions to the Structure and Content of the Curriculum:

Refinement of vertical     •   Removed "Geometrical Optics" from "Waves" and "Heat Transfer Processes"            •   Streamlined physics-related learning
articulation with junior       from "Heat and Gases", relevant learning contents have been incorporated into          elements in the Science (S1-3)
secondary Science              the updated Science (S1-3) Curriculum Units: Unit 12 "Light and Sound" and             Curriculum to enhance the interface
                               Unit 7 "Matter and Energy" respectively.                                               between junior and senior secondary
                                                                                                                      learning stages

Integration of             •   Elements from "Astronomy and Space Science" including structure of the             •   Integrate the Compulsory and Elective
Compulsory and                 universe, stellar luminosity, and the Doppler effect are incorporated into             parts to provide students with a more
Elective Parts                 "Astrophysics and Relativity"; Orbital motion under gravity is incorporated into       solid foundation in modern physics
                               "Physics and Engineering"                                                              knowledge
                           •   Elements from "Atomic World" including Rutherford's atomic model, the
                               photoelectric effect, Bohr's model of the hydrogen atom, and particles or waves
                               are incorporated into "Quantum Physics"
                           •   Elements from "Energy and Use of Energy" including renewable and non-
                               renewable energy sources, and the environmental impact of energy consumption
                               are incorporated into "Physics and Society"
                           •   Elements from "Medical Physics" including ultrasonic range-measurement and
                               medical imaging applications of radioisotopes are incorporated into "Waves" and
                               "Physics and Society" respectively




                                                                             101
                                                                                                                                                         Annex 3

Direction of Update      Suggested Revision on the Curriculum Content                                                 Rationale

Adjustment of selected   Deletion of the following sub-topics/learning outcomes:                                      •   Create space for integrating
content and re-                                                                                                           compulsory and elective parts
                         •   Heat and Gases
organisation of the
                                 ‐   Thermometers
sequence of topics and
                                 ‐   Transfer processes
sub-topics
                                 ‐   Microscopic and macroscopic relationship for ideal gases
                                         1
                                     PV= 3 Nmc 2

                                 ‐   Real gases
                         •   Wave Motion
                                 ‐   present information of longitudinal waves on displacement-time and
                                     displacement-distance graphs for travelling waves
                                 ‐   Geometrical optics, including ray diagrams for reflection, refraction, and
                                     total internal reflection of light, formation of image by lenses, and the lens
                                     formula
                                 ‐   Noise
                         •   Electricity and Magnetism
                                 ‐   Variation of current with applied potential difference for different
                                     materials, effect of temperature on the resistance of metals and
                                     semiconductors
                                 ‐   Effect of resistance of ammeters and voltmeters on measurements
                                 ‐   Root-mean-square value of alternating current
                         •   Radioactivity and Nuclear Energy
                                 ‐   Exponential law of decay
                                                                            100
                                                                                                                           Annex 3

Direction of Update   Suggested Revision on the Curriculum Content                                             Rationale

                             ‐   Transmutation
                      •   Astronomy and Space Science
                             ‐   Astronomy through history, including heliocentric and geocentric models,
                                 Galileo's astronomical discoveries, describe planetary motion using
                                 Kepler's laws
                             ‐   Kepler's third law for orbital motions under gravity
                             ‐   Stellar magnitudes, apparent and absolute magnitude, major spectral
                                 classes OBAFGKM, and using radial velocity curves to determine orbital
                                 radius, speed and period
                      •   Atomic World
                             ‐   Postulates of Bohr's model of hydrogen atom, including quantisation of
                                 angular momentum of an electron around a hydrogen nucleus
                             ‐   Probing into nano scale, including physical properties of materials in nano
                                 scale, working principle of transmission electron microscopes, and recent
                                 developments in nanotechnology
                      •   Energy and use of energy
                             ‐   Electricity at home, including energy consuming appliances at home,
                                 lighting, cooking without fire, moving heat around and Energy Efficiency
                                 Labelling Scheme
                             ‐   Energy efficiency in building and transportation, including building
                                 materials used to improve the energy efficiency and electric vehicles
                      •   Medical Physics
                             ‐   Making sense of the eye and the ear

                                                                       101
                                                                                                                                                  Annex 3

Direction of Update   Suggested Revision on the Curriculum Content                                             Rationale

                              ‐     Medical imaging using non-ionizing radiation
                              ‐     Medical imaging using ionizing radiation
                      Reorganisation of the sequence of topics and sub-topics:                                 •   Learning content is aligned with the
                                                                                                                   historical development of physics to
                      •   Classical Physics is reorganised as "Mechanics", "Thermal Physics", "Waves",
                                                                                                                   reinforce the nature of science
                          and "Electricity and Magnetism", aligning with the historical development of
                          physics                                                                              •   Incorporation of electricity and
                                                                                                                   magnetism, and aerospace
                      •   Domestic electricity, electromagnetic induction, alternating currents, transformer
                                                                                                                   applications into "Physics and
                          and high voltage transmission of electrical energy are incorporated into "Physics
                                                                                                                   Engineering" highlights the
                          and Engineering"
                                                                                                                   application of physics in daily life
                      •   Concepts related to intensity from "Astronomy and Space Science", "Atomic
                          World", and "Energy and Use of Energy " are integrated and incorporated into         •   Facilitating a progressive approach to
                                                                                                                   learning and applying the concept of
                          "Waves"
                                                                                                                   intensity and related calculations
                                                                                                                   across different topics

                      Adjustments to learning outcomes of topics and sub-topics:                               •   Making existing learning objectives
                                                                                                                   and outcomes more clear
                      •   "Thermal Physics": Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
                                                                                                               •   Aligning with recent developments in
                      •   "Electricity and Magnetism": Kirchhoff's laws
                                                                                                                   science and technology
                      •   "Physics and Engineering": Applications of sensors
                                                                                                               •   Incorporating learning outcomes
                      •   "Physics and Society": Sustainable development and carbon neutrality, physics-
                                                                                                                   based on prior knowledge to
                          related careers, physics and innovation and technology
                                                                                                                   strengthen student understanding and
                      •   "Astrophysics and Relativity": Astronomical observations
                                                                                                                   consolidate learning


                                                                        102
                                                                                                                                          Annex 3

Direction of Update   Suggested Revision on the Curriculum Content                                       Rationale

                      Enrichment of the following sub-topics/learning outcomes:                          •   Aligning with the national 15th Five-
                                                                                                             Year Plan, including aerospace
                         •   Kinematics of simple harmonic motion
                                                                                                             technology, quantum technology, etc.
                             ‐   Variation of displacement, velocity, and acceleration with time
                             ‐   Forced oscillation, damping, and resonance
                                                                                                         •   Aligning with recent developments in
                                                                                                             science and technology
                         •   Polarisation of light as an evidence for light as transverse
                                                                                                         •   Benchmarking against high school
                         •   Aircraft in fluid
                                                                                                             physics curricula and examinations of
                             ‐   derive continuity equation and solve related problems
                                                                                                             major economies worldwide
                             ‐   recognise the role of Bernoulli’s principle and Coanda effect in
                                 generating lifting force for aircraft
                             ‐   apply the Bernoulli’s equation to solve problems related to aircraft,
                                 including pitot tube
                         •   Quantum Physics
                             ‐   probabilistic nature of quantum particles
                             ‐   Quantum superposition
                             ‐   Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle
                         •   Relativity
                             ‐   Frames of reference
                             ‐   Principle of invariant light speed
                             ‐   Time dilation and length contraction
                             ‐   Spacetime diagram




                                                                         103
                                                                                                                                                      Annex 3

Direction of Update        Suggested Revision on the Curriculum Content                                            Rationale

Strengthening scientific      •   A new topic, "Scientific Inquiry in Physics", is introduced to replace the       •   Providing students with ample
inquiry skills                    existing "Investigative Study". This topic specifies the key learning elements       learning experiences in scientific
                                  of scientific inquiry and engineering design, from which teachers can select         inquiry and strengthening their
                                  and integrate into practical activities across different topics. Key practical       scientific inquiry abilities
                                  tasks for each topic are also included in the suggested learning and teaching
                                  activities and computational physics activities for teachers' reference




                                                                             104
                        Membership of the Working Group on

                 the Review of the Physics Curriculum and Assessment



                        (From November 2023 to February 2025)



Chairperson:           Prof YEUNG Chi-ho



Members:               Mr CHOI Wai-kit

                       Mr CHUNG Sai-chak

                       Mr HONG Chun-yin

                       Dr JIM Kwok-lung, Michael

                       Mr KONG Maverick Chapman

                       Dr LEUNG Po-kin

                       Ms LIN Chi-wan

                       Mr PANG King-fai

                       Mr TAM Kai-hang

                       Mr TSANG Shi-hon

                       Mr TSUI Kin-chung

                       Mr WAN Kwok-tung

                       Mr WONG Wai-keung



Ex-officio Members:    Mr LEUNG Yat-yin, Leon (EDB)

                       Mr SZETO Yuk-tong (HKEAA)



Secretary:             Mr LO Kam-hung, Leo (EDB)




                                         105
                      Membership of the CDC-HKEAA Committee on

                                        Physics



                          (From September 2023 to August 2025)



Chairperson:             Prof LAW Kam-tuen



Members:                 Dr CHOI Tat-shing

                         Dr JIM Kwok-lung, Michael

                         Mr KONG Maverick Chapman

                         Mr LEE Cheuk-wa

                         Dr LEUNG Kin-yi (until Apr 2024)

                         Dr LEUNG Po-kin (from May 2024)

                         Prof LING Chi-chung

                         Mr PANG King-fai

                         Mr TSANG Shi-hon

                         Mr TSUI Kin-chung

                         Mr WAN Kwok-tung

                         Mr WONG Wai-keung



Ex-officio Members:      Dr LAM Wai-lim William (EDB) (until June 2025)

                         Mr LO Kam-hung, Leo (EDB) (from July 2025)

                         Mr SZETO Yuk-tong (HKEAA) (until Feb 2025)

                         Mr LING Chi-yeung (HKEAA) (from Mar 2025)



Secretary:               Mr LO Kam-hung, Leo (until June 2025)

                         Mr LEUNG Yat-yin, Leon (from July 2025)


                                           106
                      Membership of the CDC-HKEAA Committee on

                                         Physics



                          (From September 2025 to August 2027)



Chairperson:             Prof LAW Kam-tuen



Members:                 Mr CHEUNG Fung

                         Dr CHOI Tat-shing

                         Dr CHOY Siu-hong

                         Ms CHUN Tsz-ching Jorcylene

                         Mr KONG Maverick Chapman

                         Mr LEE Cheuk-wa

                         Dr LEUNG Po-kin

                         Prof LING Chi-chung

                         Mr NG Ki-fung

                         Mr NG Kwok-fung

                         Mr TSANG Shi-hon



Ex-officio Members:      Mr LO Kam-hung, Leo (EDB)

                         Mr LING Chi-yeung (HKEAA)



Secretary:               Mr LEUNG Yat-yin, Leon (EDB)




                                           107
